The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Life of Clara Barton, Volume II
(of 2), by William Eleazar Barton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Life of Clara Barton, Volume II (of 2)
       Founder of the American Red Cross

Author: William Eleazar Barton

Release Date: April 29, 2022 [eBook #67954]

Language: English

Produced by: MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CLARA BARTON,
VOLUME II (OF 2) ***





  THE LIFE OF CLARA BARTON
  IN TWO VOLUMES

  VOLUME II

[Illustration: CLARA BARTON AT EIGHTY]




  THE LIFE OF

  CLARA BARTON

  FOUNDER OF

  THE AMERICAN RED CROSS

  BY

  WILLIAM E. BARTON

  AUTHOR OF “THE SOUL OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN”
  “THE PATERNITY OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN,” ETC.

  _With Illustrations_

  VOLUME II

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON AND NEW YORK

  HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

  The Riverside Press Cambridge

  1922




  COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY WILLIAM E. BARTON

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


  The Riverside Press

  CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS

  PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.




  CONTENTS

  VOLUME II


  I. FIRST KNOWLEDGE OF THE RED CROSS                        1

  II. THE FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR                               10

  III. HER ILLNESS FOLLOWING THE FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR        55

  IV. RETURNING HOME                                        77

  V. THE YEARS OF SICKNESS AND RECOVERY                     88

  VI. THE FORERUNNERS OF THE RED CROSS                     115

  VII. THE YEARS OF LONELY STRUGGLE                        120

  VIII. THE BIRTH OF THE AMERICAN RED CROSS                144

  IX. THE TRIALS OF A TREATY                               161

  X. THE PERILS OF SUCCESS                                 172

  XI. CLARA BARTON AT SHERBORN                             199

  XII. THE RED CROSS IN PEACE                              215

  XIII. CLARA BARTON AT HOME AND ABROAD                    259

  XIV. CLARA BARTON IN CUBA                                280

  XV. CLARA BARTON’S RETIREMENT FROM THE RED CROSS         294

  XVI. CLARA BARTON AT HOME                                307

  XVII. CLARA BARTON’S RELIGION                            317

  XVIII. THE PERSONALITY OF CLARA BARTON                   326

  XIX. CLARA BARTON’S LAST YEARS                           361

  XX. CLARA BARTON’S DEATH AND RESURRECTION                369

  INDEX                                                    381




 ILLUSTRATIONS


  CLARA BARTON AT EIGHTY                        _Frontispiece_
  Photograph by Clara Barton Drew

  FACSIMILE OF PRINCE BISMARCK’S LETTER                     32

  FACSIMILE OF STRASSBURG DIPLOMA OF HONOR                  40

  DECORATIONS OF CLARA BARTON                              256

  CLARA BARTON’S SUMMER HOUSE AT OXFORD, MASSACHUSETTS     308

  IN THE CEMETERY AT OXFORD: GRAVE AND RED CROSS MONUMENT  376




THE LIFE OF

CLARA BARTON




CHAPTER I

HER FIRST KNOWLEDGE OF THE RED CROSS


When in 1869 Clara Barton went to Europe in quest of health, she had
never so much as heard of the Red Cross. That organization had been in
existence in Europe for more than five years, but the number of people
in America who knew anything about it was exceedingly small. The United
States was not then a member of the international organization which
recognized the Red Cross, nor did it become a member for many years
thereafter. This was not because the United States Government did not
know about it, but because this country had no purpose or desire to
join in an organization established in Europe for purposes in which it
was generally believed this country had no occasion to participate.

It is necessary to be explicit on this subject. The meeting which
gave the Red Cross to the world took place at Geneva, Switzerland,
on February 29, 1863. At the call of a committee, which already had
behind it the formal endorsement of eleven national governments, the
international organization was formed in Geneva on August 22, 1864. At
this meeting the cross of red upon a white ground was adopted as the
insignia of the convention. Twenty-two governments promptly gave their
adherence to this convention. The United States was not among them,
although it had been formally invited to be present.

The Red Cross did not lack for an advocate in America in that early
day. The Reverend Henry W. Bellows, D.D., chairman of the Sanitary
Commission of the United States, earnestly desired that America should
have been among the original nations adhering to the treaty; but his
pleadings were met with indifference and with pronounced opposition.
Mr. George P. Fogg, United States Minister to Switzerland, and Mr.
Charles S. P. Bowles, European Agent of the Sanitary Commission, were
informally present at the Geneva Convention. The Secretary of State
authorized Mr. Fogg “to attend the meeting in an informal manner, for
the purpose of giving or receiving such suggestions as you may think
likely to promote the humane ends which have prompted it.” He added
that Mr. Fogg was not to attend if any emissary of the Confederate
Government was allowed to be there.

It is interesting and gratifying to know that Mr. Bowles was able to
report to the convention concerning the important work done in America
by the Sanitary Commission. But neither Mr. Fogg nor Mr. Bowles could
give any assurance that the United States would do anything toward
the formal endorsement of the Red Cross, or become a member of the
convention.

Dr. Bellows exhausted all his efforts to secure some recognition of the
movement in America, and finally gave it up in despair. From February
9, 1863, when the movement began in Geneva, until May 20, 1881, when
James G. Blaine wrote to Clara Barton that President Garfield would
recommend to Congress the adoption of the international treaty, was
a period of eighteen years, during which time the United States of
America turned a deaf ear to every entreaty to participate in the work
of the Red Cross. That the United States even at that late date came to
be a participant in the results of the Geneva Convention was due to the
untiring faith, devotion, and perseverance of Clara Barton.

She was not one among many good women working for this common end. She
was not a member of a committee or other organization beginning feebly,
but gradually gaining strength until the object was accomplished. Alone
she learned of the Red Cross; alone she brought tidings of it back to
her own country; alone she wrote of it, talked of it, brought it to the
attention of distinguished men, carried her faith in it from desk to
desk in Washington, and cherished the hope of it through long years,
until just before the assassination of President Garfield, she received
from him, through his Secretary of State, the assurance that the United
States would accept the treaty which thirty-one national governments
had previously adopted.

In September, 1869, Clara Barton went abroad in quest of health. For
several months following the loss of her voice on the platform she had
been fighting nervous prostration in America, and had found that she
must turn her back on everything that suggested work. Acting under
medical advice, she sailed in September, and, after a short sojourn
in Scotland with no more than a look at London and Paris, she came to
Geneva in Switzerland, bearing letters of introduction from the Swiss
Minister in Washington, the Honorable John Hitz, to the American
Consul and the American Ambassador. It was there Clara Barton learned
of the Red Cross.

Had she but known it, a Red Cross Society had actually been formed
in the United States in 1866, but had died without securing national
recognition or attracting public attention. Of that organization we
shall have occasion to speak hereafter. It was called “The American
Association for the Relief of the Misery of Battlefields.” Information
concerning it is preserved in a letter of the Reverend Henry W.
Bellows, D.D., President, to Monsieur J. Henri Dunant, Secrétaire du
“Comité International de Secours aux Militaires Blessés.” The few
people who knew of this organization in 1866 had very nearly forgotten
about it by 1869, and its great-hearted organizer, Dr. Bellows, had
become completely discouraged with respect to any recognition of
the movement in America. How Clara Barton came into touch with this
organization as it existed abroad she told in a lecture which she
prepared and delivered in a number of places on her return from Europe
at the close of the Franco-Prussian War. As during this period her
health was so poor that her diary was kept with great irregularity,
this lecture gives us our best account of her journey and succeeding
events:

 Most of you, I presume, know of me only as connected with our own war,
 and probably little of that, and, unless I give a word of explanation,
 it will remain a mystery to you how I ever came near a war in another
 country, and, in military parlance, we must connect the two by a
 “pontoon bridge,” and get ourselves across on it.

 Our war closed in the spring of ’65. Almost four years longer I worked
 among the débris, gathering up the wrecks, and sometimes, during the
 lecture season, telling a few simple war-stories to the people over
 the country, in their halls and churches.

 One early winter evening in ’68 I stood on the platform of one of the
 finest new opera houses in the East, filled to repletion, it seemed
 to me, with the most charming audience I had ever beheld,--plumed and
 jeweled ladies, stalwart youths, reverend white-haired men. Gradually,
 and to my horror, I felt my voice giving out, leaving me; the next
 moment I opened my mouth, but no sound followed. Again, and again,
 and again I attempted it, with no result. It was finished! Nervous
 prostration had declared itself. I went to my home in Washington,
 lay helpless all winter. Finally, by my physicians I was ordered to
 Europe, and in early September, ’69, I was able to go.

 I came in time to Geneva, when, while we were waiting, anticipating
 and settling ourselves, one day there was announced a visit from a
 body of Geneva gentlemen, having some business with me.

 They introduced themselves as the officers of a society known as
 the International Convention of Geneva,--more familiarly, the Red
 Cross,--having for its object the amelioration of the sufferings of
 war, the succor and nursing of the wounded and sick in battle, the
 relief of prisoners, the guarding against famine and pestilence, and
 whatever may befall a people, under the scourge of war.

 And this, in its international character, extends not alone to its
 own, but to all nations within the compact.

 This society had been formed in 1865, at the instance of Dr. Louis
 Appia,--there present,--a noted surgeon in the Italian wars of
 Napoleon III, who had at that date called a convention composed of
 delegates from the civilized nations of the whole world, formed
 their laws for international neutral action in all wars extending
 to all peoples, framed their treaty and presented it for signature,
 through the delegates present, to the nations which they respectively
 represented. In less than two years this compact had been signed and
 entered into by twenty-five distinct governments comprising all the
 civilized and some semi-civilized nations of the globe.

 With your kind permission, I will depart for a few moments from my
 narrative and speak of the nature of the international compact, which
 may not be familiar to you.

 This treaty, consisting of ten articles, and making material changes
 in the articles of war governing the medical and hospital departments
 of all armies, provided among other things for entire neutrality
 concerning all hospitals for the care of sick and wounded men; that
 they should not be subject to capture; that not only the sick and
 wounded themselves, but the persons in attendance upon them, as
 surgeons, hospital stewards, and nurses should be held neutral, and
 free from capture; that surgeons, chaplains, and nurses, in attendance
 upon the wounded of a battle-field at the time of its surrender,
 should be regarded as non-combatants, not subject to capture, and
 left unmolested to care for the wounded so long as any remained upon
 the field, and, when no longer needed for this, be safely escorted to
 their own lines, and given up; that soldiers too badly wounded to be
 capable of again bearing arms should not be carried away as prisoners,
 but offered to their own army if in retreat it could take them. They
 must be placed in hospitals and cared for, side by side with the
 wounded of the enemy; that all convoys of wounded or evacuations of
 posts should be protected by absolute neutrality; that all supplies
 designed for the use of the sick or wounded should be held as neutral
 and entirely exempt from capture by either belligerent army; that
 it should be the duty of both generals in command to apprise the
 inhabitants, in the vicinity of a battle about to take place, of the
 fact that any house which should take in and entertain the wounded of
 either side would be placed under military protection, and remain so
 as long as any wounded remained therein, and that they would be also
 exempt from the quartering of troops and ordinary contributions of
 war, thus literally converting every house in the vicinity of a battle
 into a furnished hospital and making nurses of its inmates.

 In order to carry into effect these great changes, it would be needful
 to have some one distinctive sign, a badge by which all these neutral
 peoples and stores could be designated. There must be but one hospital
 flag among all nations within the treaty, and this same sign must
 mark all persons and things belonging to it. The convention studied
 diligently for this sign; at length it got so far as to decide that a
 cross would be acceptable to nearly all peoples. They next said, “We
 represent here the great war-making monarchy of the world.”

 This little Republic of Switzerland, so small that one of us could
 crush her between our thumb and finger, has had the courage to invite
 us here to consider our cruelties and call upon us for some better
 system of kindness and humanity than we have heretofore practiced.
 For this brave lesson she deserves something of us. We cannot take
 her flag; she has fought a thousand years for that, and will not give
 it up; but if she permits, we will reverse its colors--a white cross
 upon a red ground--and make a red cross on a white ground the one
 distinctive sign of humanity in war, the world over. The consent was
 given and this committee of gentlemen who had called the convention,
 with Monsieur Gustave Moynier as its president, was reëlected by
 all the nations as the international medium and head of war relief
 throughout the civilized world. To anticipate a little, I would say
 here that our adhesion to this treaty in 1882 has changed our articles
 of war; our military hospital flag. We have no longer the old faded
 yellow flag, but a bright red cross at every post, and the same sign
 to be worn by all military surgeons and attendants, if the orders of
 the War Department have as yet reached them, for we are to-day, you
 will be glad to know, not only in full accord with this International
 Treaty of Geneva, but are considered one of the strongest pledged
 nations within it.

 There were at this time thirty-one nations in this great compact,
 comprising all the civilized and even some of the semi-civilized
 nations of the globe, all with one great and incomprehensible
 exception, the United States of America.

 It had been three times presented to our Government; once at its
 formation during our war and twice since, without success, and without
 any reason, which, to the members of the convention, seemed sufficient
 or intelligent.

 And it was to ask of me the real nature of the grounds of this
 declination that the interview had been sought.

 If there were something objectionable in their articles, they might
 be modified to meet our laws, or even our prejudices--that some clue
 might be gained, which they could understand. They had thought of
 everything. If it had originated in a monarchical government, they
 could see some justifiable caution, but a sister Republic older than
 our own--and yet all monarchies had signed it. In their perplexity
 they had come to me for a solution of the problem. What could I say?
 What could each or any of you have said, if confronted with this
 question?

 Simply that you did not know anything about it, and you were sure the
 American people did not know anything about it, or ever had heard of
 it. That the Government, or rather some officer of the Government,
 to whom the matter had been assigned, had decided upon and declined
 it individually, and it had never been considered in the national
 councils, nor in any way made known to the people.

 I knew it must be so: that it had simply gone by default with no real
 objection; that our Government was too rushing to attend to details
 outside of political influence.

 I could only answer these gentlemen that I feared the matter was not
 sufficiently understood, being in a foreign language, and I hoped it
 could be better presented at some future time. I need not say that
 this committee of seven members and myself became friends.

 I read their Articles of Convention, their published bulletins and all
 reports, and, as we progress, we shall see if, in the dark days that
 followed, I found reason to respect the cause and appreciate the work
 of the Geneva Convention.

On Miss Barton’s arrival in Switzerland she made her home with the
Golay family, father and mother of Jules Golay whom she had befriended
in America, and who extended to her every possible courtesy while she
was in their home and in their country.

Switzerland is beautiful in summer and early autumn, but in winter
it is no improvement on New England. The beginning of cold weather
found Miss Barton in discomfort. She celebrated Thanksgiving, and soon
afterward left Switzerland for a milder climate.

She had a cordial invitation to spend the winter in London, but
declined the opportunity. London fogs are inhospitable even to
Londoners, and, to any one in Clara Barton’s condition of health, they
are most depressing. She determined instead to go to the Island of
Corsica.

Corsica did not agree with Clara Barton. The mild weather was
favorable, but she found that she needed as much quinine there as she
had required in the South. In the spring she returned to Switzerland,
where her home was at the United States Consulate with Mr. and Mrs.
Upton, and where she resided from March until the 26th of May. Then
she went to Berne for the sake of some baths which had been highly
recommended to her. While there, an event occurred which caused her to
forget that she was an invalid in search of health.




CHAPTER II

THE FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR


While Miss Barton was at Berne, in the villa of a friend, the
Franco-Prussian War broke suddenly upon Europe. Nothing that happens in
France or Germany fails to register influence at once on Switzerland.
While she was there she received a call from Louise, the Grand Duchess
of Baden, who, having learned of the presence there of an American
woman so distinguished in war relief, invited her to go to Strassburg,
which was in a state of siege, and prepare for the relief which already
had become necessary and soon would be urgent. The baths were not so
complete a tonic as this call to service. Yet it did not seem to her
that she was strong enough to undertake this work.

Only a little later she had another invitation from Dr. Louis Appia,
who had been one of the movers in the Geneva Convention. This was her
opportunity to witness the actual work of the organization of which she
had heard:

 On the 15th of July, 1870, France declared war against Prussia.
 Within three days a band of agents from the International Committee
 of Geneva, headed by Dr. Louis Appia (one of the prime movers of
 the convention), equipped for work and _en route_ for the seat of
 war, stood at the door of my villa inviting me to go with them and
 take such part as I had taken in our own war. I had not strength to
 trust for that, and declined with thanks, promising to follow in my
 own time and way, and I did follow within a week. No shot had been
 fired--no man had fallen. Yet this organized, powerful commission
 was on its way, with its skilled agents, ready to receive, direct,
 and dispense the charities and accumulations which the generous
 sympathies of twenty-two nations, if applied to, might place at
 its disposal. These men had treaty power to go directly on to any
 field, and work unmolested in full cooperation with the military and
 commanders-in-chief; their supplies held sacred and their efforts
 recognized and seconded in every direction by either belligerent army.
 Not a man could lie uncared for nor unfed. I thought of the Peninsula
 in McClellan’s campaign, of Pittsburg Landing, Cedar Mountain, and
 second Bull Run, Antietam, Old Fredericksburg, with its acres of
 snow-covered and gun-covered glacée, and its fourth-day flag of
 truce; of its dead, and starving wounded, frozen to the ground, and
 our commission and their supplies in Washington, with no effective
 organization to get beyond; of the Petersburg mine, with its four
 thousand dead and wounded and no flag of truce, the wounded broiling
 in a July sun, dying and rotting where they fell. I remembered our
 prisons, crowded with starving men whom all the powers and pities
 of the world could not reach even with a bit of bread. I thought of
 the widows’ weeds still fresh and dark through all the land, north
 and south, from the pine to the palm; the shadows on the hearths and
 hearts over all my country. Sore, broken hearts, ruined, desolate
 homes! Was this a people to decline a humanity in war? Was this a
 country to reject a treaty for the help of wounded soldiers? Were
 these the women and men to stand aloof and consider? I believed, if
 these people knew that the last cloud of war had forever passed from
 their horizon, the tender, painful, deathless memories of what had
 been would bring them in with a force no power could resist. They
 needed only to know.

Soon Clara Barton was on her way to the front. She went, not to
Strassburg, but to Basle, where she witnessed with great satisfaction
the efficiency of the Red Cross system. Basle is in Switzerland, just
at the German border, but there representatives of both belligerent
nations had their headquarters for purposes of relief of suffering.
The Red Cross, protected by international agreement, had its base of
supplies in neutral territory, and the agents of both armies organized
their relief forces without molestation from each other. Wherever
a battle occurred, relief could be and was provided in many cases
before the first drop of blood was shed. Miss Barton’s admiration for
the work of this society grew as she contrasted its efficiency with
the unpreparedness and deadly delay which she had known all too well
through the Civil War:

 As I journeyed on and saw the work of these Red Cross societies
 in the field, accomplishing in four months under their systematic
 organization what we failed to accomplish in four years without
 it--no mistakes, no needless suffering, no starving, no lack of care,
 no waste, no confusion, but order, plenty, cleanliness, and comfort
 wherever that little flag made its way, a whole continent marshaled
 under the banner of the Red Cross--as I saw all this, and joined and
 worked in it, you will not wonder that I said to myself, “If I live
 to return to my country, I will try to make my people understand the
 Red Cross and that treaty.” But I did more than resolve, I promised
 other nations I would do it, and other reasons pressed me to remember
 my promise. The Franco-Prussian War and the war of the Commune were
 both enormous in the extent of their operations and in the suffering
 of individuals. This great modern international impulse of charity
 went out everywhere to meet and alleviate its miseries. The small,
 poor countries gave of their poverty and the rich nations poured out
 abundantly of their vast resources. The contributions of those under
 the Red Cross went quietly, promptly through international responsible
 channels, were thoughtfully and carefully distributed through
 well-known agents; returns, accurate to a franc, were made and duly
 published to the credit of the contributing nations, and the object
 aimed at was accomplished.

 France, Germany, and Switzerland had been in the international compact
 for years past, all organized, every town and city with its Red Cross
 Relief Committee, its well-filled workrooms like our relief societies
 in our war, but all prepared in times of peace and plenty, awaiting
 the emergency.

 The Swiss headquarters were at Basle, bordering on both France and
 Germany; and there all the supplies were to be sent and held on call
 from the hundreds of workers at the fields, for the use of the sick
 and wounded of either side indiscriminately wherever the need was
 found greatest. The belligerent nations had each its own headquarters;
 that of Germany at Berlin, with the Empress Augusta at its head; that
 of France, at Paris, under the auspices of its lovely Empress.

 But you will understand that the international feature of this
 requires that all contributions from other nations be sent through
 the international headquarters; hence, no people within the compact,
 except the belligerents, could send direct to either France or
 Germany, but must correspond with the Central Committee at Geneva, and
 learn from it the place of greatest need and the proper agents on the
 spot to whom the consignment should be made. This wise provision both
 marked and sustained their neutrality.

 Up to this moment, no point beyond Basle had been reached. This was,
 then, the great central dépôt of the International Red Cross, and it
 was worth something to have seen it as I saw it in less than two weeks
 after the sudden declaration, a declaration as unexpected as if some
 nation should declare war against us to-morrow.

 My first steps were to the storehouses, and to my amazement I
 found there a larger supply than I had ever seen at any one time
 in readiness for the field at our own Sanitary Commission rooms in
 Washington, even in the fourth year of the war; and the trains were
 loaded with boxes and barrels pouring in from every city, town, and
 hamlet in Switzerland, even from Austria and northern Italy, and the
 trained, educated nurses stood awaiting their appointments, each with
 this badge upon the arm or breast, and every box, package, or barrel
 with a broad bright scarlet cross, which rendered it as safe and
 sacred from molestation (one might almost say) as the bread and wine
 before the altar.

 You will conclude that quiet old historic Basle was, by this time,
 a busy city. It was frightened out of its senses. Bordering on both
 France and Germany, it lay directly on the possible march of either
 army on its way to the other; and the moment Switzerland shall allow
 this crossing, her neutrality will be declared broken, and not only
 Basle, but all Switzerland, will be held in a state of actual war and
 become common battleground for both.

 I passed a week in that city among this work, to learn it more
 thoroughly, to be able to judge it in its practical bearings,
 its merits and demerits, so far as I could, before giving my
 qualifications and endorsement. You will not wonder that Basle felt
 her responsibility and trembled for both her own safety and the safety
 of the State!

Not very long did she remain in Basle. Soon a dispatch was received
from Mülhausen, and Clara Barton, no longer an invalid, set out
again for the front. She was not alone; accompanying her was a young
woman who thenceforth became her companion, and who some years later
followed her to America, Miss Antoinette Margot. Accompanied by this
devoted girl, she set forth as she had done nine years before, for
the relief of suffering on the battle-field. She told the story of it
in an address which she gave afterward, which was little more than a
transcript of her diary:

 A mile from Basle, we met the pickets, but passed without serious
 interruption for the first six miles, when the detentions became
 longer, and the road lined with fugitives fleeing to Switzerland,
 entire families, carrying such articles as were possible: the better
 classes in family and public carriages; the next, in farmer and
 peasant wagons, drawn by horses, oxen, cows, and often the animals
 of the family accompanying the wagon which contained the most useful
 articles for an emergency--kettles, beds, and clothing.

 Those who could not afford this style of removal were wearily but
 hastily trudging along on foot, carrying in their arms such as their
 strength would allow, and the tired children plodding along on behind,
 or drawn in little carts, with bundles of clothing and bits of bread.

 Sometimes a family was fortunate to have a cow or a goat with them
 when they had no wagon. Sometimes, after the Bernese custom, a large
 dog drew the wagon of luggage. But in some manner all were making on,
 often in tears, and always with grief in their faces. All day we saw
 but two carriages going in our direction. But all whom we met looked
 at us in astonishment. “The Prussians are coming,” or, “There has been
 a terrible battle and everybody is being killed. _Turn back, turn
 back!_”

 Sometimes one would be so earnest as to come to the heads of our
 horses, to urge us to return, and it was not always easy to keep our
 driver in heart.

 At ---- we were met and stopped by a large body of people, the mayor
 at the head, and our destination inquired, and at the same time
 informed that it was exceedingly hazardous to proceed, as great
 battles were going on at a short distance from Mülhausen, and that
 the Prussians were crossing the Rhine in great force. But when to all
 this we replied that we were aware of the state of things, and that
 was the reason of our going, that we went to care for the wounded
 of the battles, they all cried with one voice, “Mon Dieu--God bless
 you,” and the old white-haired mayor led the way to the side of our
 carriage, to take our hands, exclaiming, “God preserve and be with
 you, my children, and He is with you, or you would not be here on this
 mission.” And the crowd that jostled in the street, one after another,
 followed his example, with the tears falling over their faces, even to
 the little children to whom we reached down our hands to reach theirs,
 or to touch them as they were held up to us.

 No wonder they wept! Their fathers, sons, and brothers would be in the
 bloody carnage so soon to follow. Already they had bade to God only
 knows how many the last farewell.

 At length they let go our bridles and we passed on, and, with such
 scenes every moment in some form occurring, we performed the remainder
 of our journey to Mülhausen.

 We made our way directly to the President of the International
 Committee of the Red Cross of Mülhausen, Monsieur August Dolfus.

 A dispatch had just been received from the International Committee
 of the Red Cross at Mülhausen, France, inviting me to come there.
 Dr. Appia and his noble band of pioneers had evidently passed that
 way. This would be in a direct line to Strassburg, and the field
 of Weissenburg, and I decided to leave by the earliest train next
 morning.

 As good fortune would have it, there came to me at this moment a
 kind-featured, gentle-toned, intelligent Swiss girl, who had left the
 _canter de vaud_ to go alone to care for the wounded. The society
 introduced her to me.

 Perhaps it would be well to anticipate so far as to speak of this
 young lady more fully, for all through you will know her as my
 faithful Antoinette--Antoinette Margot, Swiss by birth, French by
 cultivation, education, and habit. The two national characteristics
 met and joined in her. The enthusiasm of the one, the fidelity of the
 other, were so perfectly blended and balanced in her, that one could
 never determine which prevailed. No matter, as both were unquenchable,
 unconquerable. She was raised in the city of Lyons, France, an only
 daughter, and at that age an artist of great note, even in the schools
 of artistic France. Fair-haired, playful, bright, and confiding,
 she spoke English as learned from books, and selected her forms of
 expression by inference. One day she made the remark that something
 was “unpretty.” Observing a smile on my face, she asked if that were
 not correct. I replied that we do not say “unpretty” in English.
 “No. But you say unwise, unselfish, unkind, and ungrateful--why not
 unpretty?” “I do not know,” I answered. I didn’t either.

 There was something in that face to be drawn to “at sight,” and to her
 astonishment and delight I told her she might accompany me.

 Scarce was this arrangement completed when breathless messengers
 rushed to tell us that the French still fled before the troops of
 the Prince Royal, that the Prussians were marching direct upon the
 Rhine, if indeed it were not already crossed, and that the French had
 destroyed their railroad to Strassburg, that the rolling-stock of the
 road had been run off to save it, and that even the station was closed.

 This was after dark--the news was not of a nature to favor delay.
 Instead of five o’clock by train next morning, I would start at
 daybreak by private carriage.

 At length a _cochère_ was found who would undertake the journey--the
 task of driving to Mülhausen for a consideration which, under the
 circumstances, it was quite possible for him to obtain. At the
 appointed hour, with some small satchels, the requisite supply of
 shawls and waterproofs, with my quiet, sensible young companion, I set
 off once more, shall I say--for “_the front_”? That expression was
 very strange after a lapse of five years, and I had thought never to
 hear it again in connection with myself.

Arriving at Mülhausen, Miss Barton found there was no present need
of her services. She determined to set forth for Strassburg. With
great difficulty she made her way thither. Through rain and mud, with
conveyance almost impossible to obtain, she finally arrived, a distance
of seventy-two miles, which journey she completed in a single day.

She was received with honor at Strassburg. The United States Consul and
Vice-Consul were both Germans, but both had fought in the Civil War on
the side of the Union, and they both knew of Clara Barton. The Consul
had been a surgeon and the Vice-Consul a chaplain. Both welcomed her to
the Consulate and to their homes.

But Strassburg was about to undergo bombardment. The city was then
under French rule, but its population was mixed. It contained besides
its own proper inhabitants many German-Americans just then eager
to get out of Alsace. The Consul got an omnibus full of them, with
Clara Barton in the van, and set out to place them inside the German
lines. He took them as far as he was allowed to go, and turned back on
horseback. Clara Barton and her omnibus full of people moved on. They
carried the American flag. Part of the way it served to enable them to
pass the sentries. But when they reached the German outposts, it ceased
to afford them safe passage:

 We had the United States flag at our front, and the first sentry
 halted us to learn what it was. When informed, he promptly disputed
 it. He had been in Mexico, and Guatemala and Australia and the
 Sandwich Islands, and it was not the American flag at all. Reference
 to a chart of flags convinced him, and we passed. But this made us
 aware of a great mistake we had committed.

 In our hurry of getting off in the rain and darkness of the early
 morning, we had forgotten our International Red Cross Flag, and all
 our insignia. There was no return--as well seek to go back through the
 gates of death. We must trust to luck.

At the demand for the Red Cross insignia by the keen, acute sentry,
Miss Barton retired, seized the bow of red ribbon, without which color
she was seldom seen, and twisted it into a red cross which, with the
thread and needle taken from her pocket, she sewed upon her arm.

 The next sentinel, about a league from Strassburg, recognized our
 flag, saluted it, and did not even halt us.

These were the conditions under which, for the first time, Clara
Barton wore the insignia which, in America, was destined to be forever
associated with her name.

The outer German sentinels were now safely passed; but before she was
permitted to enter the lines of the German army she was informed that
if she entered she must remain. She might return if she wished within
the French lines, or she might make her way again into Switzerland,
but if she entered the German lines she must be willing to remain
there until the termination of the war. She had no desire to go back
to Strassburg and submit to the bombardment. She did not now desire
to return to neutral territory. She entered the German lines and made
her way to Carlsruhe, where she was a guest in the home of the Duke
of Baden. She and the Grand Duchess Louise became devoted friends.
The last letter Clara Barton wrote before her death, and with the
knowledge that she had but a few hours to live, was written to the
Grand Duchess Louise. Among the tributes that lay upon the grave of
Clara Barton when the earth closed over her was a beautiful laurel
wreath from the Grand Duchess Louise.

It was an accident that put Clara Barton inside the German lines. She
had planned it otherwise when she went to Strassburg. She had rather
expected that her work would be to the wounded French, but the fortunes
of war put her within the opposing lines, and to her it mattered
little. Her interests were not those of a belligerent. She was ready to
minister to the suffering of either army.

Again Clara Barton was on the battle-field. From Carlsruhe she visited
in succession several of the bloody fields. But when Strassburg fell,
as it did September 28, 1870, she turned her back upon the comforts of
the grand ducal palace, and entered the city where a few weeks before
she had been the honored guest of the United States Consul. Thousands
of its inhabitants were homeless and in danger of starvation. She
organized a workroom where she set two hundred and fifty poor women
to work. For forty days she and Antoinette Margot did their work amid
the ruins of this distressed city. At first there was nothing to do
but to give relief on application. There lie before the writer some of
the original meal tickets which were issued at this time. But before
long she saw that this plan if continued, would pauperize the women.
She devised the plan by which they were to work and be paid for it
whenever they were able to work. She wrote a letter to Count Bismarck,
being introduced to him by the Grand Duchess Louise, and which obtained
official recognition for her type of work:

  COUNT BISMARCK
  Governor-General of Alsace
  HONORED COUNT:

 Through the politeness of your adjutant and his amiable lady, I learn
 that Your Highness will kindly permit me to communicate with you in
 reference to the work I am endeavoring to perform among the destitute
 people who are so fortunate as to fall under your protecting care. But
 speaking no German, lacking confidence to attempt a conversation in
 French, and fearing that English may not be familiar to you, I decide
 to write, subject to translation, the little explanation I would make
 of my work, its origin, progress, and design.

 I entered Strassburg the second day after its fall, and, observing
 both the distress of its inhabitants and their bitterness toward their
 captors, who must always remain their neighbors, I deemed it wise,
 while they should receive the charity so much needed, that something
 of it be presented by German hands. In this view I was most cordially
 met by that noblest of ladies, the Grand Duchess of Baden, to whom
 I am also indebted for this introduction to you, and immediately,
 under her generous patronage, I returned with an assistant to do
 what we could in the name of Germany. At first, we could only give
 indiscriminately to the hundreds who thronged our doors. But,
 directly, I perceived that a prolonged continuance of this system
 would be productive of greater disaster to the _moral_ condition of
 the people than the bombardment had been to their physical; that in a
 city, comprising less than eighty thousand inhabitants, there would
 shortly be twenty thousand confirmed beggars. Only a small proportion
 of these families had been accustomed to receive charity, but one
 winter of common beggary would reduce the larger part to a state of
 careless degradation from which they would scarcely again emerge. It
 seemed morally indispensable that remunerative employment in some form
 should be given them. Again I consulted Her Royal Highness, who kindly
 approved, generously making the first contribution of materials, and
 we opened our present “Work-rooms for Women” in the month of October.
 To say that the results have surpassed my most sanguine expectation
 is little, the facts are much more; but a stranger both to people and
 language, it is not singular that my work, which depends entirely
 upon public patronage, has often lacked the necessary means to attain
 the full measure of success.

 My original design was to aid not only the inhabitants of Strassburg,
 but those in other portions of Alsace who are equally destitute. I
 thought that to be just to all and produce the best moral influence,
 the employment, and the payment, should be given to Strassburg, thus
 making of the inhabitants _workers_, instead of _beggars_, but that
 the warm garments made by them should be sent to the half-naked
 peasants of the villages, and little country homes where the harvest
 has been lost, and neither money nor clothing comes within reach.
 And to the extent of my means I have done this. The peasants have
 heard of the rooms, and often walk two and three leagues to ask for
 garments, and the clergymen from around the old battle-fields, and
 from Bitch, are making appeals in behalf of their half-naked and
 shivering people. Both my sympathy and my judgment would favor the
 hearing of these appeals so far as possible. This population must
 always be the neighbors, if not a part, of the German people; it
 will be most desirable that they should be also friends; they are
 in distress--their hearts can never be better reached than now; the
 little seed sown to-day may have in it the germs of future peace or
 war.

 But pardon my boldness, Honored Count; I am neither a diplomatist nor
 political counselor; I am only a maker of garments for the poor.

 I have objected to the purchasing of materials for my work
 from magazines, believing that, if the attention of some large
 manufacturers of stuffs were called to the subject, materials could be
 supplied in a much better manner.

 Other noble societies, I rejoice to say, have sprung up later, all of
 which I believe will confine their praiseworthy efforts to the city
 of Strassburg, and in every respect but that of affording employment
 will, I trust, prove sufficient for the necessities. My little work
 has been the pioneer, that ploughed through the earliest and deepest
 drifts, and which, though often weary and disheartened, still seeks
 to push beyond the beaten track, over the fields, and along the
 hillsides, and gather the sufferers out of the storm.

 After this, I fear too lengthy, explanation, will Your Highness kindly
 permit me, for the sake of perspicuity, to arrange under two or three
 distinct heads the prominent features of my work.

 1st, I desire to give employment, and payment therefor at the usual
 rates, to some portion of the destitute families of Strassburg.

 2d, To distribute the garments made by them among the people of the
 surrounding districts which have been reduced by the calamities of the
 war.

 3d, That, beyond this, I design to make no appropriations of
 charities, but to refer all such applicants residing within the city
 to the various societies and committees of the same.

 4th, To attain this object and carry on the work is required,
 material, in warm stuffs of both wool and cotton, suitable for
 clothing for working-men, women, and children.

 5th, Money to pay the workers,--sufficient for the number employed.

 STRASSBURG, Dec. 9th, 1870

Miss Barton also sent an appeal to America for assistance in the
purchase of material. Her letter to the New York “Tribune” brought
her prompt response, and she was not without means for the support of
her work. She used the money which was sent to her in such fashion as
to make it do double duty. She bought material and had it made into
garments largely by the women who needed those garments for themselves
or their families. She paid them for their work in vouchers--two francs
a day, which was good pay; and she sold them the products of their work
at low prices. They received good wages for their labor and good value
for their wages, but, wherever they were able, they had to work for the
vouchers they got, and pay for the clothing they obtained.

I have some of the odd little two-franc vouchers which she required
the women to give. She was not held to any system of accounting, and
when there was need she spent money without vouchers; but wherever it
was feasible, she did her business in a business-like way, and she
taught the women to be business-like. In her final accounting, only
a surprisingly small fraction of her money had been expended without
vouchers.

On Christmas Day of 1870, her forty-ninth birthday, she wrote to Mrs.
Frances Childs Vassall a letter in which she gave an account of her own
work and also passed a distinctly unfavorable judgment upon the French
as they appeared to her at that time:

  “WOMEN’S WORKROOM”
  STRASSBURG, ALSACE, Dec. 25, 1870

  MY DEAR FANNIE:

 With your usual sagacity you timed your letter _just_ to the moment.
 It was Christmas Eve, five o’clock, cold as Greenland. I had sent my
 assistants home the day before to enjoy a few days of leisure with
 their friends. I sat writing at the farthest end of my large room,
 from which only a range of white curtains separated and enclosed me in
 my little “counting-room.” The postman’s rap at the door caused me to
 look up, and through the curtains I could discern a singular glimmer
 of lights like stars, but moving from point to point, as if the
 firmament were not satisfied with the arrangement of its luminaries,
 and sought the opportunity to rearrange. Startled at first, I rose
 from my seat to rush out, but suddenly remembering the evening and
 the occasion it occurred to me that my presence at that especial
 instant might not be desirable and I reseated. After a minute more of
 shifting and fluttering, my little domestic Emily appeared between the
 curtains, “Here are two letters, and will you please to walk out.”
 The letters were from you and Fannie Atwater, and the walking out
 revealed a Christmas tree in full blaze all for myself. It had been
 arranged and left by my good ladies before they had departed, with
 instructions to the domestics to produce and light it at five o’clock
 in the evening. It abounded in fruit and flowers and mosses, and
 some little nice things which their good hearts had dictated for my
 comfort. And so, in the delicate shadows falling like tracery upon the
 snow which spread beneath its branches, I sat me down and read your
 dear, welcome letter. Although you did not intend a word of sentiment
 in it, nor a touching sentence, I could not truly say that my hand
 did not sometimes brush across my eyes as I read; it was so like old
 times to receive a whole letter from you, all from you, and all for
 me. I knew I did not deserve it. I have been so remiss in writing, and
 I don’t know how it happens. I can only account for it on your own
 grounds, that when we are occupied and feel that there is something to
 say there is no time to say it, and when unoccupied we become listless
 and there seems to be nothing to say. I am always disgusted at this
 state of things in the human economy, but I can neither reconstruct
 nor mend it. It is a little more than a week since I posted a long
 letter to Sally all about myself, selfish as could be, and I must not
 inflict a similar chapter on you, as you will be compelled to go over
 that when it arrives. I am rejoiced to hear from yourself that you are
 better than when I left.

 The greatest obstacle I meet in the way of a full restoration of
 strength is the utter inability to get sleep enough; an average
 of five hours is the maximum. If I by chance succeed in getting a
 half-hour beyond this one night, I have it “docked off” the next. When
 I was stronger this would do me; I could run my machine at full speed
 all day upon this power, and did it for years; but now the belts are
 slack and the wheels slip and I lose so much power that my pond is all
 drawn off. I should be so glad if I could adopt your plan of a nap in
 the afternoon, but I cannot get it unless by mere accident once in a
 great while. But I, too, am so much better than when we last saw each
 other that I feel I should never mention the subject of health and
 strength again while they are as good as at present.

 I thank you for mentioning to me Mrs. Livermore’s lectures. I know she
 was a favorite in Worcester; you know she was always a favorite with
 me, although I never met her. Madame de Gasparin’s appeal for peace
 has found a warm and strong advocate in Mrs. Howe. I hope some good
 may come of it. All that you say upon the subject is true, and it is
 no small amount of “picking up” that women have to do in consequence
 of these reckless fellows; from boyhood to manhood and from manhood
 to age, it is all the same. I can never see a poor mutilated wreck
 blown to pieces with powder and lead without wondering if visions of
 such an end ever flitted before his mother’s mind when she washed
 and dressed her fair-skinned baby. Woman should certainly have some
 voice in the matter of war, either affirmative or negative, and the
 fact that she has not this should not be made the ground on which to
 deprive her of other privileges. She shan’t say there will be no war,
 and she shan’t take any part in it when there is one, and because she
 doesn’t take part in war she mustn’t vote, and because she can’t vote
 she has no voice in her government, and because she has no voice in
 her government she isn’t a citizen, and because she isn’t a citizen
 she has no rights, and because she has no rights she must submit to
 wrongs, and because she submits to wrongs she isn’t anybody. What does
 she know about war? Because she doesn’t know anything about it, she
 mustn’t say or do anything about it. “Three blind mice--cut off their
 heads with a carving knife--three blind mice.”

 I pray for peace, and all that may promote it, and if there be a
 power on earth which can right the wrongs for which nations go to
 war, I pray that it may be made manifest, but when I think I fear.
 How supreme an international court must it have been to be able to
 induce the Southerners to liberate their slaves or to convince them
 that the “mudsills” and “greasy mechanics” and “horned Yankees”
 were a people entitled to sufficient respect to be treated on fair
 international ground! And how much legislation would it have taken to
 convince the world what a worthless bubble of assumption was France,
 so utterly unworthy the leadership she assumed, and to have laid her
 in all respects so open before the world that it should with one voice
 repudiate her leadership and refuse to follow her as heretofore in
 frivolity, immorality, folly, fashion, vice, and crime! She seems to
 me to have been only one great balloon, and now that the bayonets and
 bombs have pierced it full of holes it sends out tens of thousands
 of little balloons in its collapse. It is bad for France, but I am
 not certain but the lesson will be beneficial to the rest of the
 world. I don’t know if we may always trust councils--we had one at
 Rome not half a year ago that voted a dogma which turned backward the
 progress of enlightened thought two centuries, and how great a power
 of legislation would have been required to overthrow that decision!
 But I suspect the fear of Victor Emmanuel’s bayonets have seriously
 interfered with it. Oh, I don’t know; it is such a mystery, and
 mankind the greatest mystery of all! I shall never get it right in
 this world, whatever may happen in the one that sets this right. But
 how prosy I am--and it all comes of that five hours’ sleep. You know
 Beecher says, “If the preacher doesn’t sleep, his hearers will.” I
 hope you reserved the reading of this till you were ready for your nap.

Soon after the fall of Paris, Miss Barton determined to make her
way thither, but before leaving Strassburg she placed before the
authorities of that city her views of the kind of organization which
should be permanently established there for the relief of those who
were suffering by reason of the war. That letter shows how thoroughly
she understood the problem of administering relief without pauperizing
the beneficiaries:

  MONSIEUR BERGMANN
  Membre du Comité de Secours Strasbourgeois

  MONSIEUR:

 Your very courteous request, that I would present something of my
 ideas in reference to the subject of employment for the poor of your
 stricken city, demands, perhaps, that I explain, first, the reason
 and origin of my own presence here. A long and familiar acquaintance
 with the calamities of war led me to direct my steps to the gates of
 your besieged city the first day that it was possible to enter, viz.,
 September 29th. Not as a matter of curiosity, for bombarded cities had
 long ceased to possess any novelty for me, but to ascertain if there
 were any _service_ I could render.

 My earliest visit was to your civil hospital, and its wards of wounded
 women, which were indeed a novelty in the history of the world. Seeing
 no better way of serving them, I took a written account of each woman
 at her bedside, what she had suffered, and what she had lost, and,
 carrying the sad record, placed it personally in the hand of Her Royal
 Highness, the Grand Duchess of Baden, which, I trust, contributed
 a little toward directing to your afflicted city the immediate and
 active sympathy of that Court and Capital.

 This accomplished, I returned with my present excellent and efficient
 assistant, Miss Zimmermann, to learn what further could be done. A
 few days’ observation convinced me that, in the majority of instances,
 the actual loss of property which had been sustained by the class of
 persons who came to demand charity was of less real importance to them
 than the total loss of their customary remunerative occupation; that
 while the first merely reduced them to want, the latter would make of
 them permanent beggars and vagrants, thus doing for their _moral_, all
 that the bombardment had done for their _physical_, condition.

 With the somewhat forlorn hope of being able to arrest in a few
 individual instances these disastrous consequences, I at once
 commenced the system of work-giving, in which occupation you have
 found me, and concerning which you have done me the honor to ask some
 opinions and recommendations.

 If I might be so bold as to make a single recommendation, in
 reference to this unhappy population under their present calamitous
 circumstances, it would be that of the most immediate promotion of
 honest industry; that at the earliest moment labor be made to walk
 hand in hand, and step by step with charity, and, wherever it is
 possible, to _precede_ the charity that gives without return; to open
 every possible avenue of employment to all classes of individuals,
 especially the women and children, in view of the peculiar nature
 of the calamities of the present hour which have left so large a
 proportion of them without the husband and father of the family upon
 whose labor they must have been more or less accustomed to depend in
 former times.

 A first step would certainly be the making of garments with which
 to keep themselves comfortable and wholesome, and, if I might be
 permitted to make a suggestion, it would be that strong, but cheap,
 colored material, either of wool or cotton, suitable for dresses,
 skirts, and sacques for women and girls, and pantaloons and blouses
 for men and boys, be purchased either from manufacturers or merchants
 (all of whom are suffering from the effects of the war) and, carefully
 fitted and arranged, be given to women to make up in their homes,
 after the manner which we have pursued with the thirty or more who are
 at present employed from these rooms.

 True, every woman will not sew well at first, but we have found that
 nearly every one will learn, and have now no trouble with our workers,
 and the garments made by them are good enough to be placed in any
 ordinary clothing bazaar for sale.

 The immediate disposition to be made of this clothing when finished
 is still an important question. For the _moral_ effect upon those who
 are to receive it, I would recommend that it be not given outright
 and entire, as this course still has the tendency to foster habits of
 beggary and vagrancy which it is so desirable to discourage. Receipt
 without return is ever demoralizing, and for this, it were better that
 the poor, even, pay _something_ for what they receive, if it be only
 a small proportion of the original cost, and with this view, I would
 recommend the placing of the articles in a kind of bazaar connected
 with and forming a part of the present noble establishment of the
 “Comité” of which you are a member, and a price, more or less real,
 and more or less nominal, be placed upon them, such a price as will
 bring them within the reach of all excepting the most abject, who are
 forever, perhaps, to be treated after the ordinary modes of wholesale
 charity; but the effort should be always to reduce this class as much
 as possible, by lifting up out of it every family and individual that
 kindly encouragement, paid labor, and reasonable prices can elevate
 above it. One would soon find that a small sale room of this kind
 would not necessarily be confined to the few varieties which I have
 named, but shoes, stockings, and many articles of ordinary apparel,
 and perhaps, also, many articles useful in the family household would
 find their way into it, and thus, through the generous and protecting
 hands of the Comité, substantial aid and a first impetus be given to
 many a small but worthy and unfortunate artisan of your city who now
 finds no purchasers for his products, or no material to commence his
 work, and to the smaller merchants who find now no purchasers for
 their goods.

 I would not have it supposed that I present this little idea as a
 permanent _cure_ for existing ills, but as a momentary help in time of
 trouble until the hard season passes, and business has time to resume
 a little its ordinary course.

 Care would have to be taken to guard against imposition, to see that
 persons did not buy to sell again. The same vigilance which is now
 exercised in regard to those demanding _charity_ would be necessary
 here. One may _beg_ to sell, as well as _buy_ to sell. But it should
 not discourage the work that it is liable to abuse. _God’s_ best
 gifts to man are hourly abused; shall we expect more for ours?

 All articles would not find purchasers, it may be said. True, but
 what remains in hand will constitute the supply to be given in direct
 charity, and it is presumed that there will always remain a demand
 in this quarter equal to the supply, even under the best systems of
 distributive and protected labor.

 It may be asked if this system will not operate against the merchants
 who deal in ready-made clothing. It should not in the least, as these
 people could never purchase a garment at full price and consequently
 could not become their customers.

 In order that my suggestions should not seem merely theoretical,
 permit me to turn for a moment to the more practical details. It may
 be asked if garments can be made to fit women and girls without actual
 measurement? I would reply that, with a graduated scale of five or
 six sizes, we have found no more difficulty in fitting women than the
 tailor finds in fitting men and boys without actual measurement.

 Again, will there not be much waste of material in cutting quantities
 of garments? Very little; literally none; in the graduated sizes, one
 garment cuts from the form left by the other, down to the smallest
 size, and of the pieces too small for these we have the custom of
 making caps for boys and mittens for the hands, so that no piece
 larger than the size of a child’s hand need be left unused.

 It would be proper to mention among materials to be purchased the
 small articles necessary in the making-up of garments, such as thread,
 laces, buttons, agraffes, tapes, etc., etc., the sale of which would
 still benefit another class of small merchants.

 I may have dwelt too strongly and too long upon the subject of putting
 a price upon charities, but if so, I can only ask to be excused upon
 the ground of the moral elevation I so ardently desire for the unhappy
 people of your city, and remind you that it is a simple thing to
 leave this idea untouched, as the giving of work by no means depends
 upon it, and this course alone pursued after the ordinary methods of
 charity will of itself place the name of the “Comité of Strassburg”
 high upon the roll of the active charitable institutions of the world.

 With sentiments of the highest consideration both for yourself and
 your Honorable Comité, I remain, dear sir,

  Very truly yours
  CLARA BARTON
  STRASSBURG, January 3d, 1871


By this time there were organized American agencies for the relief
of suffering caused by the war. Clara Barton endeavored to establish
relationships with one of these at Brussels or Antwerp, but without
conspicuous success, as shown by her letter to General Burnside:

  GENERAL BURNSIDE
  MY ESTEEMED GENERAL:

 I am sure that a word will suffice to remind you of our interview at
 Geneva, and its object; and perhaps you will recollect that I craved
 the privilege of personal introduction from you to the American
 Legation at Brussels where it seemed proper to locate the headquarters
 of the American organization for the relief of the French peasantry
 which I had then traveled half the length of Germany and the width of
 Switzerland in the rain and snows to effect. I saw then so clearly all
 which has since transpired that I could not repress the conscientious
 demand of duty to use every effort within my power to prepare for the
 safe receipt and faithful and wise distribution of the forthcoming
 gifts of our countrymen, although at that moment no societies assisted
 and no monies had been raised in America to my knowledge except by the
 French and Germans residing there. I had, like yourself, come fresh
 from the scenes of strife, want, and desolation, and was chilled and
 bewildered by the cool indifference of the Americans residing here
 to whom I referred in such warmth of confidence. Only yourself, of
 all I met, gave a word of hearty approval. You will remember as I was
 surrounded that I could not tell you this at that moment; neither had
 I words to tell you how grateful I was for your commendation of my
 plans. Even the names of those who knew me well were withheld from
 me, as it seemed to me to be exceedingly moderate and modest, proper,
 hesitating and haggling until after you had given yours; then they
 came, so much weak men need a leader. Then I hurried back to my post
 of duty at Strassburg, and on to Brussels, still in the rain, to be
 there on the “fifth day,” hoping to find and through you gain the more
 willing aid of the American representation there, and found something
 like American headquarters either there or at Antwerp; but to my
 excessive regret you had already passed out of town as I came in, and
 I stood alone in that strange city with my heavy, unfinished task. I
 called upon General Shetland, who very properly recommended me to his
 superior. I called upon him. He met me sharply and unkindly; informed
 me in a needlessly rude manner that he never heard of me before, and
 couldn’t understand what I wanted; that he saw no names on my paper
 which justified him in placing his there, and he should not do it. Of
 course I left his presence without a word. Genial General Shetland was
 hurt and offered his name “if it would do any good,” but I could not
 suffer him to place himself in unpleasant relations with his superior
 and declined it.

 Still in the storm and mud, defeated and discouraged, sore and weak,
 I left Brussels and made Metz, which had that day opened its hungry
 gates. After a few hard days’ work among its famishing, fevered
 population I came once more to my work in Strassburg. I now saw
 clearly that I could effect nothing in the way of an organization to
 aid the work of our countrymen when they should see fit to commence
 it. I was grieved for the loss, through this account, to the suffering
 French and the loss of satisfaction to our countrymen eventually when
 the wiser ones should come to realize that they had _not_ done their
 _own work_ in _their own_ name and manner, and with the best results.
 But I was only one woman alone, and had no power to move to action
 full-fed, sleek-coated, ease-loving, pleasure-seeking, well-paid, and
 well-placed countrymen in this war-trampled, dead, old land, each one
 afraid that he should be called upon to do something.

On June 1 Miss Barton left her well-organized work in Strassburg and
hastened to Paris, where she spent about six weeks in the relief
of suffering and distress. From there she went to Lyons, where she
established another workroom such as she had had in Strassburg.
Something of the detail of her work in Paris is afforded us in a brief
letter to a gentleman in London, acknowledging a gift of five hundred
pounds sterling for her work. We see something of the grim situation
which she confronted in that city. A much more cheerful letter is one
which she wrote to Annie Childs just as she was about to leave Lyons
at the end of August. Annie had been her dressmaker for many years.
This letter, informing Annie that she was now the head of a dressmaking
establishment of her own, shows how fully at this time she seemed to
have recovered her old vivacity, and to be, amidst the desolation of a
conquered country, her own wholesome, self-reliant self:

  LYONS, FRANCE, August 20, 1871
  MY DEAR ANNIE:

 If I were to make an apology as long as my offense, I could write
 nothing else, but I don’t like apologies; you don’t either, do you?
 Then let me hasten to proclaim myself an idle, lazy, procrastinating,
 miserable do-nothing and good-for-nothing; if that isn’t enough, I
 leave the sentence open for you to finish and I sign it squarely when
 you have done and call it “quits.” But really it _has_ been too bad. I
 have neglected everybody in general, not you in particular. I thought
 I was too busy to write. I don’t suppose I was, only that I did not
 employ my time well. _I know_ this is often so and perhaps always. I
 wish I had been better educated in this regard as well as every other.
 If you are ever married, as you doubtless will be, and have a family
 of eight or ten children, I beg you will make it a specialty in their
 several educations that they be taught to do things in the proper
 time. You will do me a favor to remember this as one of “my efforts
 for the good of humanity.”

 [Illustration: [_Facsimile_]]

 [Illustration: PRINCE BISMARCK’S LETTER]

 I wanted all last winter to tell you about my “dressmaking” and
 describe to you my “shop.” I knew it would interest you if no one
 else. Now, wasn’t that the last thing you would have thought of,
 that I should come to Europe and set up _dressmaking_, and _French_
 dressmaking at that? I knew the fact would be a little surprise to
 most of my old friends who knew me best, but to you I imagine it a
 matter of bewildering astonishment. Well, you should have seen
 the patterns! “Did I have patterns?” Didn’t I? And didn’t I cut them
 myself? And didn’t I direct all the making until I had imparted my
 wonderful art to others? And _you_ think my garments were fearfully
 and wonderfully made! Well, that opinion comes of your being an
 _old_ maid and so particular. I assure you, Miss Annie Childs, that
 they were nice garments and prettily cut and well made, and I found
 them in excellent demand; every one wanted them and never a word of
 _complaint of the price_; everybody seemed to be perfectly convinced
 that they were cheap enough at my first offer. I had ten young girls
 (like yours) dressmakers, and from one to three men “tailors” who
 worked twelve hours a day, but only with the shears, never an hour’s
 sewing; and no one sewed at my “shop”; only those who must be taught
 to take something out and do it over. And we made dresses and sacques
 and petticoats and chemises and aprons and hoods and mittens and
 pantaloons, vests, blouses, shirts, socks, of all kinds of material
 and all sizes that ever the tiniest baby grew to. Oh, yes, and such
 lots of things for babies,--little dresses, little bonnets, cloaks,
 blankets, two thousand garments every week. I don’t think they
 were gored and flounced and frilled as much as yours, Miss Annie
 Childs, but they were strong and warm and handsome. It is true all
 my seamstresses had not such nimble, delicate fingers as one might
 desire for the finest work; they wore very large thimbles sometimes;
 but there were plenty of small fingers in the family. They came very
 gladly twice a week to see me and showed me with great pride their
 successful efforts; always the work came home in the market basket,
 and always I knew that that same basket would load the other way
 with bread and a little meat if it were possible, but this was not
 always. But it was such a comfort to see them, week by week, grow
 better clothed themselves and the children, till by and by a woman
 and her baby came to look only like a big and a little bundle of the
 same clothing she carried in her basket. And all the working-people
 of the city came to look like walking bundles of the same clothing.
 To be sure, it took away something from the picturesque style of the
 city as I first saw it when at least ten thousand human beings were
 perfectly arranged for models for the painter and the sculptor. I
 admit that it was highly artistic, but I thought it a “_peutrop_” for
 the season, considering that the earliest snows had commenced to fall.
 Oh, but don’t you wish now that you had come and worked at the head of
 my “shop”--didn’t _I_ wish it? More than once I sighed in my inmost
 soul for you. How rich I should have been, with you at my side! Just
 think of it! I shall write to Fannie sometime when I hain’t told all
 the news to you--please hand her this if she looks patient and strong
 enough to stand it.

 How much I wonder what you are all doing at home! I seem entirely to
 have lost the thread, and from the stray little thrums which I get
 hold of I cannot pick it up. I am just now in despair about Sally.
 Some one writes me that they suppose I know all about her and Vester’s
 _sickness_! Imagine the effect of this piece of intelligence. Another
 says, it was fortunate they were with Ber and Fannie, as they were
 sure of good care!!! This is consoling. What did they have, and how
 did they get it, and how was it, and when was it, and how is it now?
 Do pray you write and tell me. I am distressed and can’t at all help
 myself. I do hope they have not had a serious illness, but I keep
 feeling all the time that _somebody_ will be sick. I keep writing
 Sally at Washington, but have no idea where she is and where you are
 this hot summer, and Fannie, poor, dear, neglected Fannie. She ought
 to cross me off her books, and I guess she has before this time. I
 know there has never been a day since I left that the entire troop of
 you all has not passed in panorama before me, and I have attempted to
 place you all as I thought it most likely to be, but I suppose I have
 been wide of the mark.

 For me, as you must have known a hundred times when I left Strassburg,
 I went to Paris, and, after six weeks there distributing clothing
 and money, I left and came to Lyons to visit a family of one of the
 younger ladies who had aided me twice since the war commenced, and
 I have remained here about as long as I was in Paris, but am ready
 to leave, and shall again this week go to Paris for a day or two to
 meet some parties of Americans who will be there on their way home,
 and from there I am to go, as I have been once, into the central
 eastern portion of France to see the places and peoples who have been
 much destroyed by the war and the sieges. I have no idea how much
 time I shall consume here. I must judge this by the condition I find
 the people in. I am almost tired of France and long for Germany or
 something which is solid and Saxon. There is no truth, no fixedness
 of purpose, nothing reliable, nothing sensible in France, and it only
 disgusts me that they have always claimed the leadership of the world
 and that so stupidly it has been conceded to them. I do hope the
 German bayonets have punched a hole in that bubble large enough to
 burst it. It is certainly time. If they were even neat, I would not
 complain so much of them, but they are such a dirty race of people,
 dirty but fashionable. One gets tired of this. Now, you will see from
 this that it is a real merit in me to work for the French. I do it out
 of pity and charity toward suffering humanity, because they need, and
 not because I gratify my love or my taste by it. I do neither. I think
 it right to do or I would not touch it, I do assure you.

 Now, there are so many people whom you see every day that I would be
 so glad to see that it makes me almost homesick to write you. Does
 Willis still remain in Oxford, and Uncle John and Nancy; how are they?
 And Mrs. Hannah Sanford and Mrs. Sigourney, and all my cousins in
 Worcester; do you see them? Cousin Lydia Grout, do you see her ever?
 The Bacons and Starrs and Cousin Maria? I am told that Cousin Ned is
 to be married, and then my Cousin Jerry, what of him, and the Dennys
 and Dr. Snow? If you see him, please remember me most kindly. And the
 Towers and Mr. and Mrs. T. W. Hammond. Don’t you see I am homesick to
 see all these people even if they have forgotten me? I cannot help
 it. I am sure you will write me a long letter full of news, just as
 is your specialty, for, Annie Childs, you know, you _do_ know, how to
 write a letter, and I shall wait for it now till it comes. You will
 address me as usual care of American Legation, Berne, Switzerland.

 How does Ber behave? Does he boss his wife any? If he does, you pull
 his ears for me, and oblige

  Yoors trooly, and believe me, your lovingest Sis
  CLARA BARTON


  BENJAMIN MORAN, ESQ.
  Chargé d’Affaires, London

  ESTEEMED SIR:

 While I acknowledge the receipt of your favor and enclosed cheque
 for five hundred pounds, permit me, in the name of the suffering of
 France, to thank you and your Committee most earnestly for the same.
 Your generous gift will enable me to send comfort into hundreds of
 desolate and more distraught families, whom I have hitherto been
 unable to reach. I beg you will permit me to explain that my attempts
 to clothe the people of France have not been the result of a desire to
 improve the personal appearance, but to aid in ridding them a little,
 if possible, from the scourge of pestilence and vermin which the war
 has so terribly spread among them.

 It is to be hoped that few will die of outright hunger during the next
 six months, but thousands must fall pitiful victims to disease lurking
 in the only old rags, in which months ago they escaped from fire and
 destruction. Disease is spread from one family to another, until
 thousands who are well to-day will rot with smallpox and be devoured
 by body lice before the end of August. Against the progress of these
 two scourges there is, I believe, no check but the destruction of all
 infected garments; hence the imperative necessity for something to
 take their place. Excuse, sir, I pray you, the plain, ugly terms which
 I have employed to express myself; the facts are plain and ugly.

How industrious she was in Paris and how bravely and cheerfully she did
her work is shown by two home letters which she sent out simultaneously
in September, one to her sister Sally and the other to Mrs. Bernard
Vassall, her long-time friend, Fannie Childs Vassall:

  PARIS, Sept. 18, 1871

  MY DEAR FANNIE:

 I have forgotten if I really did send a line in Annie’s letter or
 not. I know I wanted to, but since that I have received that precious
 “gingerbread” letter from all the family, and I have read and re-read,
 and spied into little corners to see some other welcome face peeping
 out. It was so good of Willis and Ber to set their hands and seals.
 Yes, I know all about receiving letters that call directly upon my
 heart, and my desire to answer that hour, and a thousand times I have
 said that _those_ were the very letters which were to lie longest
 in neglect and likely enough never get answered at all. The fact is
 I am over-anxious about them, and wait for a few moments of better
 opportunity, feeling that I have much to say, and so I wait and
 wait, _and these_ letters are the sore spot, the worrying sin of my
 existence, _that_ little package which I cannot put by, but which lies
 around, and looks me in the face on the most impossible of occasions,
 and reproaches in silence, and comes late at night and early in the
 morning to haunt, it may be to taunt, me a little; _that_ little
 package is the plague of my life, and yet I prize it most of all and
 couldn’t have done without it, but I can never quite dispose of it.
 Oh, yes, yes, I do understand all you try so patiently to explain to
 me, ONLY that I don’t think my poor scrap could ever have been one
 of the class of letter which burden me, for I have no recollection
 whatever of it, and seriously suspect it was only a little pile of
 trash. It has been brave of you not to get sick in all summer with
 all your work, and company and sickness besides, but I am so glad
 that Sally was with you, and I suppose Vester was also, but it is not
 mentioned where he was during his illness.

 I am spending some fine days in Paris, just what I most desired.
 I wanted to see some American people; it had been so long since I
 had seen them--and indeed there is no lack of them here. All Paris
 swarms with them, as I suppose it always does, and all grades. Some
 I am proud of, and some I am ashamed of; some speak remarkably well,
 and some cannot utter a proper sentence. Generally they are “well
 dressed,” as the world goes, but to my eye “over-rigged,” as a sailor
 would say, but always much better than the English, who are the most
 fearful dressers in all Christendom. English women are solid and
 sensible, learned and self-possessed, and all the world respects
 them; but the art of selecting and putting clothes onto themselves
 is something quite beyond their line of vision. Not that they do not
 wear enough,--oh, Heavens, no, not that,--there is always enough and
 to spare, but there is no calculation what portion or member of the
 body corporate it will be found dangling from, and Joseph’s coat bore
 no comparison. Still they are splendid women, and handsome, fifty
 per cent more beautiful than the French. The French declare that the
 Germans cannot dress in decent manner, but I have seen much good,
 comfortable-looking dressing in Germany, and I rather liked it. I
 don’t know _what_ has induced me to write so much upon the silly
 matter of dress, unless that some of my “sisterin” abroad annoy me a
 little with theirs.

 I can see how busy Ber must be with his large family and congratulate
 both him and his children upon the relationship. I imagine him to be
 the most sensible and paternal of parents. I shall be only too glad
 when you can really take your legitimate place in the work. I can see
 an equal call for your services. Go and look after the _little girls_.
 They may not like to tell all their troubles to their State Papa, but
 would rejoice to reveal some things to a mamma. Go with Ber. I think
 that is one of your “rights”--it is at least your privilege, and you
 know it is very well said that “until women get their _rights_, they
 must keep their _privileges_.” I also have something of a family in
 Europe, _some_ hundreds of state children, but of my own _immediate_
 family I have two delightful girls. They are as fully grown and
 developed as my two boys in America were, rather more, and _about as
 near alike_, but charming girls, both good as they can be, and be
 human, live girls. One is all gentleness, the other all strength, but
 both are so loving, so obedient, so true. The elder is Miss Antoinette
 Margot. She is a thorough artist, and is with me at present, painting
 and visiting the Louvre and the Luxembourg and comparing notes with
 the Parisian painters. She is at this moment painting an American
 flag, and looking back over her shoulder to ask me, “How many of the
 red stripes must commence at the field?” and ends with “Mais il est
 très joli.” Miss Anna Zimmermann is at her home in Carlsruhe looking
 after the thousand wants of a clergyman’s house, keeping the big
 brothers in order for the Universities they are plodding through;
 obeying her papa and mamma, who tell her she is too “independent and
 ambitious,” writing at odd moments as she can pick them, reading
 Carlyle, Dickens, Goethe, Schiller, as she can steal the minutes,
 pining that she must be held in just such bondage of body and soul,
 praying for the day when she may come and live with me a little more,
 and beginning a long, strong, logical letter once in a while with
 “To the Devil with the housework! Why must I fritter away all the
 best years of my own life and starve my brain to cram my brothers who
 already have been taught twenty times more than they can apply?” And
 she is right.

 But my sheet will be full and I shall have said nothing at all. I
 have just written your “Marm” and I think, perhaps, that will find its
 way to you, and you must just have had a surfeit through Annie. I am
 glad she went for a vacation. I wonder what they do at Falmouth. When
 I am home, can’t we go? I am not at all certain where I shall pass the
 winter; it may be I shall think I must work in France. I cannot tell
 how they will present themselves by winter, or I may think it well to
 quarter myself here in Paris and wait; and I have half a mind to go to
 Spain. This is perhaps the most sensible use I could make of the time.
 I must wait a little the turning of events. I can tell better after a
 month more in the east of France. I am glad you have had a visit from
 Georgie. It was nice of her to send me a line. Is not Alice with you
 now? Has she turned to ashes?--very possible--human nature can as well
 as wood or coal. Write me when you have time and don’t let Ber abuse
 you.

  Yours      CLARA

  To Ber--
  I am first-rate, how are you?      CLARA
  For particulars see within.


After the terror and bloodshed of the Paris Commune, Miss Barton spent
some time in northern France, laboring as she had labored in Paris and
in Lyons; at Belfort, where she finished her work on October 27, and
went for a little time of rest to Carlsruhe, where she was the guest
of the Reverend Mr. Zimmermann, whose daughter had labored with her at
Strassburg. Antoinette Margot was there also, glad to turn from scenes
of desolation to her work of painting.

The middle of December she went forth again in bitter cold weather,
accompanied by Antoinette Margot, distributing relief to the poor at
Mülhausen, Belfort, and Montbéliard. She spent Christmas at Strassburg,
where she served a great Christmas dinner to some five hundred of her
old acquaintances, and then returned to Carlsruhe.

Activity agreed with Clara Barton. She rose to meet great emergencies.
When the crisis was passed, she felt the effect of so long a strain.
Again and again during her lifetime she carried an enterprise
completely through to the triumphant close, and when it was done
collapsed from nervous overstrain. Twice in America that collapse had
been indicated by the total failure of her voice. At the close of the
Franco-Prussian War she collapsed again. This time it was not her
voice, but her eyesight. Her eyes were inflamed by the strain and smoke
of the battle-fields. The nervous tension aggravated the discomfort of
which the inflamed eyes were, after all, only a symptom. For several
months in the winter and spring of 1872 she was at Carlsruhe in a state
of semi-blindness.

[Illustration: [_Facsimile_]

STRASSBURG DIPLOMA OF HONOR]

We have a little sidelight on Clara Barton’s work among the French
women in an undated letter from Belfort, almost certainly by Antoinette
Margot. An American woman in Paris had evidently asked her for some
account of the work of Clara Barton, and she had promised to write it.
The letter gives some intimate glimpses into the character of her work:

  [October, 1871]
  DEAR MADAM:

 Faithful to the promise made to you one bright day in Paris more
 than two months ago, I write. You remember that it was a kind of
 clandestine pledge, made in low tones, that I would one time tell you
 something of the doings of your compatriot, who has the “singular
 habit, _for a woman_,” as the world would say, of doing something and
 saying nothing.

 From much observation, I am convinced that Clara Barton never makes
 the least report of what she does, unless, for some cause, she
 considers it to be absolutely indispensable, and then, in a form so
 plain and business-like that one would read, and turn the paper,
 little dreaming of all the sentiment, strength, heart, poetry, and
 labor that lay hidden beneath that unpretending exterior.

 It were too long to tell you of the few weeks in Paris, following
 your departure. What, between the sympathies for the families of the
 wretched prisoners of Versailles, and the outpouring Alsatians who
 refuse to remain German, there was little rest for body or soul. Some
 entire families had even followed from Strassburg, knowing that Miss
 Barton went from there to Paris, and certain of relief if they should
 find her there. They did find her, and now occupy good positions. One
 is even placed for life in the civil service of the French Government
 (if the Government shall last so long). But these things, done through
 rain and storm, cost strength, and I was near to report to you a sick
 list.

 Happily, that is past, and my present hour must be applied to telling
 you of Miss Barton’s work in a third general point of desolate France,
 viz., the brave little town of Belfort, which has rendered its name
 illustrious by the heroism of its defense. Here we are, facing the
 high citadel and the famous cannon “Catharine” that twenty-five
 thousand German bombs could not silence, and here day after day works
 your countrywoman trying to overcome the greatest amount of misery
 possible among so many.

 The room in which she received her people has been tendered by
 Monsieur l’Administrateur of the town, and is in his own mansion, and
 himself and family are proving at every moment to your noble sister
 how proud they are of having obtained this favor.

 It is in this room that she stands from morning till night, smiling
 and graceful as always, receiving family after family, and endeavoring
 to learn by herself what are their circumstances, how deeply they have
 suffered, to express to them her sympathy, and assist them with some
 money. It is probable that many of these poor people in this land of
 aristocracies have never listened to words so respectfully spoken,
 and are often so overcome by this added kindness of manner extended
 to them that the first answer which comes is a sob,--often no words
 can come,--and trembling, blessing hands held out to her are all that
 _can_ speak. But oh! how eloquently they speak!

 They are very poor, these relics of an eight months’ siege. Some,
 of course, have lost nothing in material by the war, having nothing
 to lose but time and labor, but the larger portion have lost all or
 nearly all they possessed, the fruit of forty or fifty years of hard
 work, and remain homeless, hopeless, old, broken, dispirited, sick
 since they have lived in cellars, and without the smallest prospect of
 regaining their lost property. Do wars in Republics leave the people
 as badly off, I wonder?

 It is not a rare thing to see a poor woman come in with her garland
 of six, seven, or eight handsome young children which she presents
 with both pride and distress. One had even thirteen, and when asked
 if all of them were still in her charge, she exclaimed, with the most
 charming simplicity, “Oh! _no_, madame, _two_ are abroad; I have only
 _eleven_ to work for.”

 To-day, a tall, thinly clad woman entered, and presented her billet,
 bearing the stamp of the mayor. “Have you children?” asked Miss Barton
 kindly, as she took it. “Have I children?” exclaimed the woman in a
 tone at once proud and pitiful. “_Dear_ child, if I haven’t. I have
 ten.” Miss Barton turned away to her table, but a stolen glance at
 her face a moment after detected something there glistening brighter
 than the gold she dropped into that hard, dark hand. “Ah,” thought I,
 as I hastened down the name as rapidly as possible,--“Ah, if only all
 the world’s work were done with a little of the heart in it how much
 nearer Heaven would seem!”

 When it was decided that Miss Barton would accept the labor of herself
 receiving the crowd of victims of the bombardment, the authorities of
 the town, fearing for her, from the roughness of these people, who,
 they said, would rush in all together, by all the doors and windows,
 placed four policemen around the house to protect her against the
 crowd. Two of them in turn have for their mission to open the only
 door by which the solicitors are admitted. But never was I so amused
 as to see Miss Barton _protecting her policemen_, and preventing these
 rough men and shrill-toned women from crowding them against the wall.
 When sometimes they are all in a quarrel, the policemen swearing like
 two thunders according to the approved French manner of preserving
 respect, she appears at the door, and in the most charming manner
 prays them to wait a little and be quiet. Then the most piercing
 voices become silent, the wildest men are ashamed of their noise. The
 only visible motions are those nearest trying to hide themselves
 behind others, and those in the distance raising themselves on tiptoe
 to see “la bonne dame américaine.” As for the policemen, they are
 perfectly puzzled, and could never have supposed that so gentle a
 lady, who never scolds or swears, could hold in order so undisciplined
 a crowd.

 Often the work is interrupted for more agreeable reasons. Once it is
 a deputation of the sisters of the civil hospital, in their snowy
 bonnets, or some other charitable institutions of the town who want to
 thank her for the gifts sent to their establishment. Another day it
 is the mayor of the town, who desires to pay respects; another time
 all the council, mercifully asking to be allowed to express to her
 their gratitude in the name of Belfort and the county. All this as a
 personal matter I hear always steadily repelled, and they are politely
 requested to bear in mind that it is America and the goodly city of
 Boston to whom, if to any, all thanks are due. But no one is so mad as
 to expect to outdo a Frenchman in official politeness, and I observed
 the president of the council, half bent, hat in hand, replying that
 their three names would be always so united in their hearts that they
 should never be able to hear the one without thinking of the others.

 This is a region almost exclusively Catholic, and the ignorance of
 the people is something deplorable. Each recipient is asked for a
 signature, and the proportion who are able to make something beyond an
 X is less than one in fifteen. Writing is an accomplishment generally
 not to be thought of, especially by the women, but when one who has
 attained so far is asked if she can give her signature, she replies,
 with the assuming grace of a noble of the blood, “Certainement,
 pourquoi pas?” But the common response is a burst of astonishment at
 the bare supposition. “I write! Mon Dieu, how should I.” A difficulty,
 by no means the smallest, is to find the kind of money to which these
 poor people have been accustomed. The immense payments of France to
 Germany all in silver and gold are fast making _coin_ among the things
 that were. The bank-notes of France never having been small in value,
 and used rather as a convenience for business than as a currency for
 the people, the poor are mostly strangers to it, and when a note was
 placed in their hands they waited, holding it a long time, and then
 ventured to inquire timidly, if that was something that they could
 get some money for, and where they should go to get it changed, and
 how they should do it? It was useless to tell them its value; they
 would have preferred ten francs in silver to twenty in paper. And,
 indeed, as they could not read, it were perhaps better for them, as
 one saw at once that they would be at the mercy of every swindler they
 met. This would not do. All notes which had been given were recalled
 and redeemed in coin, and it is certainly the occupation of one man
 from morning till night to change paper into coin as fast as it is
 required for distribution.

 But it is impossible; the night is not long enough to tell all that
 transpires during the day, and one must not attempt it. I only wish,
 as I always do, that her own people could see their countrywoman at
 work among European poor, as not one European has done. If they are
 proud of her for what she has done at home, they would be prouder of
 her in a tenfold greater degree for what she is doing abroad, never at
 the best strength, in a strange country of foreign customs and divers
 tongues.

 _Pardon, s’il vous plaît_, my miserable English; you knew what it was
 when you gave me leave to write you, and I can only thank you for the
 kind indulgence.

  Yours in sincerity
  A.


Antoinette was not quite correct, however, concerning Clara Barton’s
reports. She made rather full reports to the organizations that
supplied her with funds. To Mr. Edmund Dwight, chairman of the Boston
Committee, under whose auspices she labored during the latter part of
her time in France, she wrote an extended letter, outlining in full her
method of work, and shows how sensibly and wisely she did all her work:

  CHÂTEAU DE BELFORT
  BELFORT, Oct. 28, 1871

  DEAR MR. DWIGHT:

 Sitting down to write you after one of the hardest day’s work one
 might ever hope to find, you will not wonder if I am not dazzlingly
 brilliant.

 I should not select so inauspicious a moment but that I find your
 letter has been waiting so long without getting to me, and that I
 cannot rest until I have at least commenced a reply, even if I am not
 able to finish it to-night. It had been stayed by my own orders. My
 letters in France for a time went wrongly and some were lost, both for
 and from me, for which the postal authorities are now busy searching,
 and as the losing of letters is one of the things I cannot endure, I
 ordered mine to be held at all points where they would arrive, until
 I could arrange some safe place of reception. They have come to me at
 Belfort, and I find yours which has waited a month.

 I should have written upon leaving Paris in July if I had not thought
 every day that I might get a line from either you or Mr. Moran,
 telling me of the delivery or receipt of my large package of accounts,
 from which I might draw some inference if my manner of doing things
 were an acceptable one. After this, I grew so busy that I think I
 forgot all but my work, or rather did not realize the length of time,
 as it passed so quickly.

 You ask for my views. They have been so many and so varied that it
 would be impossible to tell them at one sitting, but I may say that my
 sympathy and judgment have pointed, and my efforts been directed, to
 three classes of sufferers, with two of which I have nearly finished,
 and the third I am at this moment among with heart and hand.

 1. These were, the families of the prisoners of Versailles, and the
 ships of the Manche.

 2. The families of Alsace and Lorraine, who, refusing to become
 German, are passing over the lines into France by hundreds, even
 thousands.

 3. And thirdly, the region of Belfort.

 The first-named of these are no longer confined to Paris, but are
 scattered now, for some distance around, poor, suffering, frightened,
 and trebly desolate.

 First, they have often lost the family support in the person of the
 prisoner; next, they wait in suspense worse than actual death for the
 result of the impending trial, and fearing often to reveal to those
 about them who they are, and why they are so destitute; and lastly,
 poor as they are, they know that the Government allows but fifty
 centimes a day for the use of each prisoner, and provides nothing
 else, not even a bed, only straw, and whatever more he has (and many
 are very ill) must be provided by the friends from outside. You will
 see how the hungry mouths and wretched homes would be robbed by pity
 and anxiety to supply this necessity.

 I have made it a portion of my care to find and supply some of these
 families; it can only be _some_, for there cannot be less than twenty
 thousand of them. There are forty thousand prisoners.

 The next in order, and a still more wretched class, if possible,
 so far as extreme _homelessness_ and _nothingness_ can go, are
 the outcoming Alsatians. The time has arrived for each to decide
 individually which to become, and remaining to take the oath of
 allegiance to Germany. In their ignorance and infatuation, they still
 believe France to be the greatest nation of the earth, and, in spite
 of her recent reverses, watch with unflinching faith to see her, at no
 distant day, rise in all her old-time power and glory, and advance in
 majesty to take back her lost possessions; and to them the thought is
 death, that, in that proud day, second only to the Resurrection, they
 and their sons must bend their necks to the Prussian helmet, and point
 their guns against the Eagles of France. Impudent expressions touching
 these points bring them into unpleasant relations with the German
 soldiery still stationed among them, who probably do not hesitate to
 mention unwelcome and unpalatable facts. This “last feather” is too
 much, and, finding the burden too heavy to be borne, the incensed
 father, or, too often, the widowed mother, gathers up the family of
 growing children, and, turning the back upon the blackened walls and
 trampled fields of the old home, makes the nearest point of the French
 lines and comes out defiant, with never a penny or a morsel. The
 French are glad to receive them, feel complimented by their loyalty,
 but are burdened and embarrassed by them. Societies for their relief
 are formed at many points, but it is only the merest trifle they can
 do for them, excepting to aid in finding employment. This often takes
 a long time, and the interim of waiting is something fearful. I found
 them largely at Lyons, which is one of the points they make on their
 way to the South of France, and Algiers. Again I found them at Paris,
 where several thousands have come in, every train bringing them,
 especially the night trains.

 I have put in practice a lesson here which I learned in Germany
 fourteen months ago, when infuriated France drove all her German
 families over her lines; viz., to meet and provide for them at
 the trains. No one can suppose for a moment that leaving Alsace
 and Lorraine and coming into France is not the most unwise and
 deplorable step these poor people could take; that they would not be a
 hundred-fold better off to remain. But I did not understand that your
 mission was to the _wise_, but to the _unhappy_, and I have taken the
 liberty to give them something.

 But while occupied with those and these, I had by no means forgotten
 Belfort, or the fact that _this_ was to be the great point when
 the right time should come. After leaving Paris, I met some very
 intelligent and practical gentlemen from that vicinity and learned
 of them many facts which have been of use to me, and always a
 confirmation of what we had both thought, viz., that help would be
 really more serviceable at the commencement of the cold weather than
 in midsummer. Their crops were abundant, especially grass. This set
 me to confer in Switzerland in reference to _cows_, and from these
 inquiries I learned something of a plan most gratifying if it could be
 realized, and I waited a little to see. This was in August, at which
 time, as you know, nearly all the cattle are on the mountains. On the
 9th of October (“Le jour de la Saint Denis”) they are returned to the
 farms! There are then often too many for the winter and they can be
 purchased at lower rates. This, then, would be the time to purchase.
 But the good idea had entered into the minds of the Swiss to make a
 collection of cattle at that time for all the vicinity of Belfort and
 Montbéliard, or where the stock had been lost. They could do this
 without sending money out of Switzerland, which they desired to avoid,
 having already done so much of it. They carried out their plan, and
 when the time arrived commenced sending, and are _still_ sending,
 to this region nearly as much stock as it is thought they can keep
 through the winter.

 When I saw these things likely to succeed, I held a conference with
 the authorities of Belfort, and asked them to tell me plainly what
 their people most needed. They replied, “Small sums of money to
 commence the winter with,” and gave this reason: There is just now
 commencing a money panic in France. The large payments she must make
 to Germany in gold and silver make these commodities exceedingly
 scarce, and all who have a little bury it in their pockets and
 bureaus, and hold it against the time when there will be no more and
 paper worth little or nothing. The smallest note, as you know, is
 twenty francs, a sum beyond the reach of a poor family, and thus there
 is nothing for them in _money_. This state of things, they assured
 me, would grow worse and worse, and, as France is only at her second
 payment (I believe), there was no room to doubt the correctness of
 their judgment. I asked how they would have it, in a sum to give to
 the people _themselves_, or should _I_ give it? Apologizing for the
 labor they were suggesting to me, they begged that I would do it if I
 could, not that they were too indolent to do the work (for they are
 splendid men, and have the welfare of their people at heart), but they
 explained, that, living among and exercising jurisdiction over these
 people, who looked to them for impossible things, it was embarrassing
 to them to make distributions among them personally. The people were
 ignorant, and all had suffered _so much_ that each one believed his
 or her case to be the _worst in the world_. And they would be much
 better satisfied with something from a stranger, which they would
 receive as a _gift_, than with ten times the sum from the municipal
 authorities, to whom they looked for “_indemnity_.” They seemed almost
 ashamed to ask of me the labor of distribution, and offered all
 possible assistance. For the town of Belfort and the nearest villages,
 the Administrateur has made the same kind of arrangement as the Mayor
 of Villette, and I am at this writing receiving at this house from
 fifty to a hundred a day, hearing their story and giving to them the
 proportion which seems best suited to their condition.

 I shall go from point to point seeing and aiding _personally_ all
 I can or until I am too tired to go farther, and after this, if
 something remain unfinished, find the proper persons to do what I have
 not done. Montbéliard, Haute Savoie, and Gex will be remembered as
 you desired. Indeed, _is_ it necessary for me to say that I shall try
 by all means in my power to carry out all suggestions which you have
 made? Time and observation have shown them to have been _wise_ and
 _good_. I have found nothing better, and only dare hope I may be able
 to execute something nearly as well as you designed.

 The money from Baring Bros. I have drawn through Paris, as far as I
 thought well in the present state of things, and indeed more of it
 than I have found convenient for the manner in which I was desired
 to distribute it, and some I must take through Switzerland or Germany
 to get the coin which will be useful to these people. The authorities
 will aid me in all these things. I have so far rather gained than lost
 in all exchanges.

 I believe I have forgotten to speak of my visit to the Prefect of
 Doubs, which was one of the most pleasant that could have been. I
 found him to be an excellent man (who desired to be remembered to
 you with great regard, regretting your illness). He seemed glad and
 touched that I had found and regarded the families of Alsace and
 Lorraine, and a little surprised that I should have “comprehended
 their condition so quickly,” as he expressed it, as they are a rather
 new feature in the chapter of French suffering, and he asked that, in
 anything I might leave with Besançon, he be allowed to draw one half
 of it from the “Comité de Secours” from time to time to aid these
 families on their distressing arrivals and passages through the town.
 I thank you very much for this pleasant and useful introduction.

 I am unable, my dear friend, at the present moment to report further,
 as I am just in the midst of my work; when it is a little over, I will
 write again, and as soon as possible I will send you all explanations
 and certificates and signatures which have come into my possession,
 and tell you as well as I am able what I have done, and how it was
 done.

 With the highest esteem

  I am very truly yours

  CLARA BARTON


 I cannot describe how painful and tiresome I find it to work _here_,
 abroad, among these strangers, with _every thought and sympathy and
 energy_ turning and rushing four thousand miles across the ocean to
 our _own beautiful and ill-fated city_,[1] with its hundred thousand
 homeless heads. At night I can realize this a little; in the morning
 I think I have dreamed a bad dream. The facts will not remain _fixed_
 with me.

 A message has been sent from the _Court_ of _Baden_ to say that I am
 desired there. This is the third time I have been asked in the last
 two months, but was always too busy to go immediately, but now that I
 am so near and the message made so direct, I must go. If I can finish
 my work first I will; if not, I must leave it a little and return. I
 have no idea what is wanted of me. I will send this enclosed to Baring
 Bros.

  Hastily

  C. B.


This work continued for some time and there came no definite date which
could be accounted its termination. For this reason and because of the
condition of her health, the final report was not presented until after
her return to America. Then in a letter to Mr. Dwight, the chairman,
and Mr. Jackson, the secretary, Miss Barton sent her final accounting,
asking for its approval, on receipt of which she proposed to return the
balance in her hands. Her letter is as follows:

  MESSRS. EDMUND DWIGHT and P. T. JACKSON
  Boston

  ESTEEMED FRIENDS:

 It has long been a subject of deep regret to me that I have been
 unable to make my report of the expenditure of certain sums of money
 placed in my hands by you, as agents for the distribution of the
 “French Relief Fund” sent by the city of Boston to the people of
 France who had been rendered destitute by the war of 1870-71. My
 apology for this long delay is physical illness, which overtook me
 before the work of distribution was completed in 1872, and has, with
 the exception of a few months, held me prostrate from that time until
 the present, more than two thirds of the time unable to leave my bed,
 and one year unable to transact the smallest item of my own business,
 or even hear of it as done by others.

 But all this time it has been a source of pain and unrest to me that
 I could not close the account and make the proper returns to you;
 and all the more so, as there is still a portion of the money which
 I did not expend, and which I desire to return to you; and only He
 who knows and comprehends all can know with what gratitude I welcome
 the past few weeks of returning strength, which have enabled me to go
 over the long undisturbed packages of letters, receipts, and vouchers
 which have traveled with and remained by me all these weak and weary
 years, and arrange them to be at last given up to you, who have waited
 upon my silence with a gentlemanly kindness seldom met in the rough
 business of life.

 Although allowed the largest liberty in regard to the place and manner
 of the distribution, I knew from you both that your preference lay
 in the direction of the _east_ of France, and accordingly Belfort,
 Montbéliard, Besançon, Savoie, and Strassburg became the scenes of
 my labors: and, as you both know my manner was to give in small sums
 to the needy in person, it only remains for me to repeat that I met
 the poor of these districts by call, through the civil authorities
 presiding over them, listened to each story of want and suffering,
 and gave such a sum as assured by the authorities would be most
 serviceable to them, and such as they themselves should have given if
 left in their hands. I was always cautioned from this quarter against
 making the sum too large, as the people had only the habit of small
 sums, and were demoralized by too much at once. This, of course, both
 increased and prolonged the labor of distribution.

 I remember to have written you that among the most necessitous I
 met were the outcoming Alsatians. An extract from a letter of mine,
 written at Belfort, October, 1871, and kindly embodied in your report,
 renders a further description of this class of sufferers unnecessary
 in mine.

 As these self-constituted exiles made their way largely into or
 through the districts I was serving, the people were keenly alive to
 the distress they witnessed, and humanely devised plans for relief.
 The one most practicable to their minds was to form a colony of
 Alsatians in the South of France and help them on to it. The climate
 was genial and productive, the country not over-populated, and the
 mayors and prefects besought me to withhold something for this
 enterprise and aid them personally in the establishment of their
 colony. I accordingly held back the money I had not expended, and went
 to Paris to learn what aid would be rendered by influential persons
 and the Government. But Paris was not so unsophisticated as the good
 people of the desolated outskirts. She was wise, polite, and had other
 aims. She immediately foresaw that these people, once broken up in
 their homes and family ties, placed on the borders of the sea studded
 with ships, would not withstand a pressure of poverty; but at the
 first approach of want would emigrate a second time and to some other
 country. Thus France would lose her soldiers, and she counted largely
 on the exasperated Alsatians some day to fight for their homes, take
 back their lost possessions, and the Rhine. Hence they not only
 discouraged but forbade the step, and I had my appropriation left on
 my hands. I went to Carlsruhe to deliberate and rest, was worn out,
 and became ill, and from that time have never been able either to
 apply the funds or (until now) arrange the papers showing how I had
 disposed of what I had applied.

 At the end of a year and a half of illness, I was able to figure up
 what still is due you, which sum, if satisfactory to you, I shall be
 happy to send you in a draft on my bankers.

 Praying that, if upon examination all is not found to be satisfactory,
 you will not hesitate to inform me, and thanking you for your kindness
 and patience, I remain,

  With the highest respect

  Most truly yours

  CLARA BARTON

  NEW ENGLAND VILLAGE, MASS.

  April 24, 1876


Accompanying this letter was a detailed statement of all moneys
received and expended, with vouchers for the disbursements. This
account was duly audited, and the committee discovered that Miss Barton
had deducted nothing for her own expenses, nor for any disbursements
excepting those for which she had sent vouchers. They therefore sent to
her the following letter:

 MY DEAR MISS BARTON:

 Mr. Dwight informed me sometime since that you have about eleven
 hundred and thirty dollars, still on hand, of the money sent to you by
 the Committee of the French Fair of which I was treasurer.

 Your account shows that you have made no charge for your expenses, and
 that you have charged us only with items for which you have vouchers,
 taking no notice of the sums given where you were unable to take
 receipts. If the account had been made up with all of these items
 included, the balance would have been nearly or quite absorbed.

 The Committee have, therefore, directed me to say that they consider
 the account balanced, and request that you will accept this letter as
 a receipt in full settlement of your account with them.

 Thanking you for your services in this work of charity and hoping that
 your health may soon be restored, I remain with great respect,

  Yours very truly

  (Signed) P. T. JACKSON

  Treasurer French Fair


There still remained in the hands of the Boston committee a sum of
something more than three thousand dollars. The committee desired
to present this to Miss Barton, who had accepted no salary during
her period of work, and whose broken health they regarded as in a
large measure the result of her arduous efforts for the relief of the
stricken people of France. This was not acceptable to Miss Barton; she
did not want the money; she wrote that she was almost the last of her
family, with no dependents, and had neither use nor desire for money a
day beyond her life nor beyond the simple needs for which her present
income was sufficient. The committee, therefore, decided to give the
money remaining in their hands to the Massachusetts General Hospital
in Boston, with a provision that the interest should be paid to Clara
Barton during the term of her natural life. The hospital concurred in
this arrangement and faithfully carried out the trust. Clara Barton
received an annuity semi-annually on $3251, the amount which finally
was paid over to that institution. With this action the committee
placed upon record their high appreciation of her service in France.

  60 STATE STREET, BOSTON
  July 1st, 1876

  DEAR MISS BARTON:

 You will wonder at my long silence, but, owing to the absence of
 gentlemen of the committee under whom I act, I have only been able to
 obtain their signatures to-day.

 The money in the hands of Messrs. Brown Brothers, including interest
 on bonds to May first, is $4521, of which one quarter (or $1130)
 belongs to Mr. Jackson’s fund. Of this I am directed to pay $150 to a
 distressed family from Massachusetts, now in Boston. The balance (or
 $3240) to pay to the Massachusetts General Hospital in trust, to pay
 income arising from this money to you during your life; afterwards to
 become the property of the Hospital.

 In making this arrangement the committee desire to express to you
 their high appreciation of your intelligence and self-sacrifice in
 distributing the funds placed in your hands, and their great sympathy
 with you in your long and painful illness, caused partly by the work
 which you did in their behalf. They recognize the great accuracy
 of your accounts, the large numbers of vouchers obtained by much
 labor, and the scrupulous care with which you have guarded the money
 entrusted to you. They wish you good health and a long life.

 I need not tell you, dear Miss Barton, how cordially I join in all
 good wishes for your health and happiness. May the Hospital pay your
 annuity until the next Centennial.

  Sincerely yours

  (Signed) EDMUND DWIGHT


FOOTNOTES:

[1] This was written shortly after the disastrous Chicago fire.




CHAPTER III

HER ILLNESS FOLLOWING THE FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR


There are few letters and no diary during the winter of 1871 and 1872.
Clara Barton was at Carlsruhe endeavoring to recover from nervous
overstrain, and learning to write without much use of her eyes. She
supposed that she had finished her work for French relief, but a letter
from a Boston committee informed her that they still had funds for
this purpose, but were not having good success in the matter of local
distribution. They begged her to take charge of what remained of their
working fund. Almost blinded though she was, she set out in winter
and traversed again a route that had become familiar to her, through
Mülhausen, Montbéliard, and Strassburg. Her work for women was still
going on, and she gave it substantial encouragement and repeated her
Christmas banquet of the preceding year in a New Year’s Eve banquet at
Strassburg. She arranged for the continuation of the work in a way that
did not pauperize the women. Then she returned to Carlsruhe and spent
the remainder of the winter. Our chief knowledge of her oversight of
these activities, as well as of her living arrangements during this
period, is contained in a letter to her sister Sarah. She had been
living in a hotel, but had taken lodgings of her own, had a little maid
to wait on her, and was able to get a breakfast to her liking, which
was beefsteak and baked potato, instead of the Continental breakfast
of hard rolls and a gallon of coffee. The beefsteak for breakfast is
interesting because Clara Barton ate comparatively little meat. She
never, however, became a strict vegetarian. Even in her old age she now
and then indulged in the luxury of a good, thick beefsteak; but this
was exceptional. Her meals, as a rule, were severely frugal, and mostly
vegetable.

  CARLSRUHE, Last Day of January, 1872

  DEAR SISTER:

 I believe I can write you a readable letter without looking on at
 all. I have used my eyes pretty much of late, and they complain so
 sadly of my bad treatment, that I have decided to give them a rest,
 and not write any more at present, but, as I don’t know how long the
 rest must continue, I don’t want you to wait without news of me for
 an indefinite period. I want to tell you that I did receive your good
 long letter, and was exceedingly glad of it. It had been a little age
 that I had not heard of you. I must write without a reference to your
 letter, for I could not read it to-day; my poor eyes ache too badly
 for that. It was long ago that I wrote you, I believe. I don’t know
 if I have written since the 25th of November, when I remember to have
 done so. If not since, I have never told you anything of my going to
 Montbéliard to give something to the poor people there who suffered so
 much by the war. I went from Carlsruhe about the middle of December
 in the coldest time we have had in all the winter. It was fearfully
 cold. Miss Margot went with me. It was a day and a half’s travel,
 and some of the way it was so cold in the train I dared not let Miss
 Margot fall asleep. I knew she was exceedingly cold, and I kept her
 awake through precaution. We spent the first night at Mülhausen with
 Mr. and Mrs. Dolphus, French people of literary note, whom I have
 known during all the war. Next day we went to Belfort and passed the
 night and Sunday with the Administrator, Monsieur Leblue, and arranged
 some trunks I had left there in October, and Monday morning we went
 to Montbéliard and called on the Prefect (a Jew), to whom I had
 previously made a donation of money, and informed him that I wanted to
 make the next donation in person. I wished to see, therefore, myself.
 He was very amiable and would arrange it, and I left him to do so
 while I went still on to Besançon to see the Prefect of Doubs. Here
 it was so cold and cheerless I could not sleep at night and returned
 next day. I was made the guest of the noble families of the town, for
 Montbéliard was an old Court town, and the grandmother of the Czar of
 Russia was a Princess of Montbéliard, so they have still relics of
 royalty there and a pretty old castle. I found excellent arrangements
 for taking care of the poor, the best I have seen in all France. They
 have committees of both gentlemen and ladies and the president of
 the ladies’ committee is a Mrs. Morell, a person so much like Mrs.
 Greffing that I feel as if I had really seen Mrs. Greffing and worked
 with her a few days this winter. They assembled in their hall and
 called their poor there, and they came in hundreds, and waited in a
 long line, or two long lines, reaching from the doors away through
 the yard and down the snowy street. At the suggestion of Mrs. Morell
 I gave them orders for wood and rent, so that the husbands could not
 compel the women to give up the money to them to get drunk on and
 abuse the family. We wrote hundreds of orders. I signed them, and then
 we went to the hall and received the women. They were my women then.
 I admitted them, and gave them the order and took in the next, and so
 day after day till all was done. The orders were drawn immediately,
 and when I left just before Christmas all the poor had wood for two
 months and rent paid until the first of April. They looked so poor,
 but were so happy at such an unexpected fortune and I was so glad
 to have been able to do it. It was Boston that did this good little
 thing--I have written the committee about it, a long letter. I thought
 they would be glad to know it while the fires were still burning.

 Then I came back, and I wanted to go to Strassburg and give something
 to my old working-women there. They would not be so poor as the women
 of Montbéliard, for much had been done for them, but I wanted to see
 and remember them, and so I said I would go. I invited Miss Zimmermann
 to go with me, as she helped me to organize the Strassburg work last
 year. I said I would not give anything in charity to these women; I
 had not permitted them to beg--they had always worked for me and been
 paid. I would give them a Christmas fête and invite them like other
 people. So we bought two splendid pine trees fresh from the Black
 Forest, and I knew all my women, so I had only to count the heads
 and buy purses. I purchased three hundred good strong morocco purses
 with steel clasps, prettily lined, and pretty little things for the
 children, and to ornament the trees many dozens of little wax candles
 and holders to light the trees. I had stopped at Strassburg on my way
 back from Montbéliard and hired the best hall in town for Saturday
 night the 30th December. On Wednesday night we went to Strassburg, had
 our invitations printed and sent to the women by post; then I ordered
 at a good bakery twenty cakes, I cannot tell you how large and high.
 Each cake would cut from twenty to twenty-five slices, big slices;
 and five hundred rolls, and I took a caterer I knew there to arrange
 chocolate and coffee. The hall had a fine kitchen and dining-rooms,
 and I asked the banks to change my money into the last issue of French
 silver, never used, and they did. The best ladies of the city came to
 help us, and the trees were set, the purses filled, the hall arranged,
 the tables spread and set so white and clean, and, oh, the trees
 were so pretty, on a long platform across all one end of the hall in
 front of two enormous mirrors and all the floors spread with moss,
 all scattered full of fine-cut white paper and isinglass, which made
 perfect snow and ice, and brightened with handfuls of little scarlet
 berries; and the hall was so brilliant with chandeliers and mirrors
 that one could read the finest print in its most distant corner. I
 tell you all this so particularly because I think it was the prettiest
 thing I ever saw. Don’t say it was that that made my eyes sore; it
 wasn’t. The hour was seven; at six-thirty the women began to arrive.
 Mr. Kruger, Vice-Consul from America, received and seated them in the
 anteroom till it was time to light the trees. I had not seen them yet,
 and did not know that so many were there, but some one came to tell us
 that our little wounded children had come and we went to that room to
 see and welcome them. When we entered the doorway, all these hundreds
 of women rose up before us like an army--not a word, still like so
 many soldiers--and stood for us to pass. At seven, the trees were
 lighted and the doors opened, and all this regiment of women walked in
 and took seats. A fine parlor organ stood under the trees, a Christmas
 hymn was struck, and these poor women in the fullness of their hearts
 joined in a burst of song such as I never heard before. They sang as
 if they meant God should know how glad they were and how grateful
 they were to be there. Then there was prayer, an address of welcome (I
 wouldn’t have them instructed), and then Mr. Kruger and your sister
 went under the trees upon the platform where all the purses hung.
 There were elegant ladies to take them down from the trees and hand
 them to me while Mr. Kruger called each woman’s name and she came up
 and gave her hand to me, and I put in it a purse of silver with her
 name and a pretty buff card attached to it; then the ladies took her
 round to see the trees and to sign her name at a table presided over
 by the Misses Rausche, of Strassburg Boarding School. Afterward they
 were taken to the refreshment room and the daughters of the clergymen
 of the city, with Miss Zimmermann at the head, received and served
 them to chocolate and all the good things; and then they did talk and
 laugh and cry for joy, and such a time some hundreds of poor women
 almost beggars I think never had. “It was worth going a mile to see.”

 All this time Mr. Kruger and I were giving the gifts, but when it
 was done I went and ate with them; then I came back and gave the
 gifts to my eleven cutters, ten pretty young girls and one tailor.
 I gave them workboxes and portfolios, etc., and then the Comité de
 Secours had arranged a little surprise for me, which the women enjoyed
 exceedingly. M. Bergmann, my old esteemed friend, the president of
 the syndicate of Alsace, addressed the women, and they all crowded
 up around the front of the platform like so many children, to listen
 to him. He told them, among other things, that Miss Barton had said
 she wished they would all keep the money in the little purses as a
 keepsake and make it the beginning of a sum for the savings bank,
 which would reopen next week. Having told them this, he said to them,
 so pleasantly and familiarly, “I think we ought to make her this
 promise, eh?” You should have heard the storm of, “Yes, yes, we will,”
 that filled the room. This finished the evening, only their good-bye
 to me, which each one insisted on making for herself. This occupied
 almost an hour, till the last one was gone, and then it was past
 eleven, almost twelve, and we went home to our hotel and to bed; but
 all the time I knew I had seen a very pretty thing.

 There were about sixty women who did not get their invitations. It
 was no wonder; they never had a letter before in their lives and the
 letter carriers never heard of them, and they lived in such old
 alleys and garrets and cellars they could not be found. But the next
 day I made a list of all these and put it in all the papers of the
 city, and it was told to them and they came to our old workrooms a few
 days afterward and we gave them their purses. When it was all done,
 we came back to Carlsruhe, one of the first days of January, and I
 have been here ever since. I had a good deal of writing to do, and I
 suppose I have used my eyes a little too much. I was going over to
 London directly after leaving Strassburg to stay with Abby and Joseph
 Sheldon, who are continually writing for me to come to them. I meant
 to have been there now, but I received a letter on my return from
 Strassburg from the head of the Boston Committee saying that they had
 held a meeting after hearing something from me and decided to ask me
 to take charge of all their unfinished business in France. They see
 that it is going wrong and beg me to take it in hand, even if I cannot
 do anything personally, to take the oversight of it. I replied to them
 and will wait for their answers. I thought then it would be nonsense
 to cross the Channel if I must recross to France again in a few weeks,
 so I decided to remain here until I could finish up on the Continent
 and go to England free.

 I do long to be free of work once more for a little while. I have been
 rather busy. I have a little home here in Carlsruhe. I got tired of
 the hotel and took some small rooms, a little apartment, and furnished
 it to suit me (rented) and have a little German girl. She was the
 private waiting maid of Madame de Mentzinger and I knew her, so I live
 as independently as I please. I can arrange my living to suit myself
 better. I can have a beefsteak and baked potato for breakfast and not
 be driven to a choice between a piece of dry bread and a gallon of
 coffee, and I can have my dinner at four and not be forced to eat at
 eight o’clock at night, as is done here.

 I am sure you have had a great deal of trouble with my things and so
 has Lieutenant Westfall; I am sorry but can’t help it. I want to write
 the Lieutenant, but dare not send him one of my blind letters. I must
 wait till I can use my eyes again. I am glad you went and visited all
 the world of Massachusetts. I want to see our old brother Dave more
 than I can tell, and I think I shall sometime. I don’t understand if
 Ida has left the Treasury for all time or on a rest. Is she not well?
 I am sorry you wandered about waiting for some one to carry you from
 post to pillar. Wait a little, Sall, and we will have a coach and one
 and ride when we please. I will have it sent over to you every day to
 take a ride on condition that you will promise to come and take tea
 with me every time, and you shan’t wait to be carried somewhere--it
 was all vexatious and heart-aching. I know it all by experience, so
 old that it seems to me it must have been a part of another existence;
 but it wasn’t; it was only the first end of this old patched and
 tangled web. What a good soul-stirring time you had at the Convention,
 didn’t you? That was splendid; shall I ever see something like that, I
 wonder? What a meeting! How I want to see and know Mrs. Livermore. I
 don’t suppose I ever shall, but I knew her so long ago. What beautiful
 things she wrote when she must have been so young; no wonder she can
 speak well. I speak very much of these things with the Grand Duchess.
 She sent for me about a week ago to spend an evening and she spoke
 of little else than the progress of woman and schools for girls in
 America. She had evidently been reading something, I presume some
 German criticism upon the too liberal spirit of America, and wished
 to compare notes, I think. I told her all as it was, and I said I
 believed in special training for all kinds of life, but that I thought
 it possible to train too much till the original spirit was crushed
 out and ashes left in the place of coals, and there was danger of
 Germany’s doing this with her great respect for discipline; that I
 thought them too strict, and that they cramped their people by rules
 and regulations and hurt many good original minds. This was plain
 speech for a woman in a plain black gown without even a ring on her
 hands to address to a Princess and Sovereign, but when I am asked I
 answer, let it be where it will. I guess it didn’t offend, for she
 sent me a very pretty letter next morning.

 I can’t think what the dress is that you speak of having made up
 and washed. I can just recall that I sent something by Dorr, but it
 couldn’t have been anything but a piece from my shelves where we cut
 for the women. I can’t think if it was calico or cotton gingham. I
 know I wanted to send something good, but he was afraid to take it
 lest he have trouble at the custom house, and they trouble him about
 his own things for it. I know we packed his boxes in terrible haste
 one night after midnight and I can’t think of anything more about
 them. This was the day but one before I cleared up in Strassburg and
 started for Paris. It wasn’t a quite sure thing if one would get there
 very safely, and so difficult was it that it took three days to do the
 traveling of one day in ordinary times. But it is better now.

 This winter is easier than the last was. I have made some friends and
 I am not a stranger in Europe any longer, and I have warm friends in
 Strassburg, and, if I do say it, last week Mr. and Mrs. Bergmann came
 to Carlsruhe to visit us, i.e., Miss Zimmermann and me. I had them to
 tea with me twice (they were at hotel) in my house, and I arranged a
 visit for them at Court. This is, I expect, the first social exchange
 of visits between a leading French officer and a German Court since
 the war--a gentleman may have visited, but not the ladies, but Mrs.
 Bergmann and the Grand Duchess visited, and, better still, the poor
 women came over to Germany to visit me. I have made some peace between
 them if they won’t fight again and spoil it all. I will enclose in
 this one of my invitations to the Women’s Fête and Christmas Tree.
 Your German letter-carrier will read it to you. Now I think, in mercy
 to your eyes, I must stop. Don’t be troubled about me; my eyes will be
 well soon. I will be very careful. I know you can’t read near all of
 this, but some maybe.

  Lovingly

  CLARA

 I thought I couldn’t write any more, but I find it so funny to write
 with my eyes shut, as if I were playing blindman’s buff, that I think
 I must do another sheet. I was afraid to commence to tell you how nice
 I thought your picture gallery was; indeed, I think it was splendid.
 How could you think of it all? How did you get up your ideas? I
 laughed till I cried again and again; indeed, I am not sure but that
 hurt my eyes some. I wish you had told me more about it. I wanted all
 the particulars. I related it one evening at tea at Madame General de
 Freystadt’s, and you should have seen the merriment of those German
 Court ladies--they have a great deal of fun in their heads. They were
 especially amused at the old hoop and line, as I explained to them our
 bold President swinging around the circle to gain popularity. Miss
 Margot has not been initiated into the mystery of your gallery yet, as
 she is at Lyons with her people, but is expected to return any day now
 to resume her studies here. I will make her full explanations as soon
 as she is back. She caricatures me sometimes, to her great amusement.
 She would not be bad help for you on such an occasion, as she would be
 in the seventh heaven if she could do it.

 No, I didn’t think of the 17th of September as being the day of Lake
 City. How well I remember that day, and how anxious a day it was,
 but after all, not unhappy. We thought that we had gained so much;
 our experiment had not failed and it did not fail in the end; it
 accomplished just what you say it did. Our dear boy lived to feel that
 he had done his work and was ready to go; a little life it was, but
 full and had in it much more than many another of fourscore and ten.
 I had not heard of Lizzie Learned’s last affliction. Can this be so?
 Where did Lizzie get such a complication of maladies, and is there
 anything in the new remedy? I have heard of it. The Grand Duchess asks
 me about it. Her first maid of honor, Mademoiselle de Sternberg, of
 whom you must have heard me make mention, is supposed to be dying of a
 cancer, but she also seems to have a multitude of illnesses. I called
 on her a few weeks ago. She was a mere skeleton and is too sick now to
 see any but her nurses.

 Does Nancy do the work at home, and are she and Uncle John all there
 are? I cannot think how it would seem there without--“Bamma”--poor
 dear, honest, faithful, Christian, guileless Bamma! who worked
 faithfully up to the last day without complaint and lay down bravely
 with the harness of life about her, without a murmur.

 Do you have much fruit this year? I am out of patience with Europe.
 I never find fruit here,--it is always a “scarce year,” they say.
 Indeed, there was none in all the Rhine Valley. Little gnarly apples
 are two and three cents apiece; prunes, which are only the plums which
 grow here, dried, are fifty cents a pound, and I have searched the
 town over without success for a little dried apple. All oranges here
 are always either sour or bitter. I have nearly forgotten, but it
 seems to me that we had better fruit arrangements at home. You see by
 this that I am quite hungry, don’t you, or I shouldn’t write of it.
 Now I think I have finished for this time. I have let my letter wait
 two days and my eyes are better.

  Ever your Sis

  CLARA


Returning to Carlsruhe, she continued her oversight of American relief
for French destitution by correspondence, though still suffering
greatly with her eyes. She passed “some very dull weeks, very green and
shady, with exceedingly long nights”; after the acute pain was over,
she learned to write with bandaged eyes, and wrote a good deal.

Her friends Mr. and Mrs. Sheldon were in London and were not satisfied
to have her in Germany alone. They sent her peremptory orders to be
ready to accompany them when they came, as they were presently to come,
down the Rhine. She went with them, left Carlsruhe, visited Strassburg
on her last tour of inspection, and set out for London by way of Paris.
On reaching Paris, they encountered an American family by the name of
Taylor, friends of the Sheldons, who had just left London for a tour of
Italy and besought Miss Barton to accompany them. Hastily she changed
her plans, and, after six weeks’ travel in Italy, she came to London.
She had dropped her diary altogether, and her correspondence with her
relatives had nearly ceased on account of her impaired eyesight, but
in London she wrote the story of her wanderings to her sister Mrs.
Vassall. The last page is missing and the letter ends abruptly, leaving
her in Venice. The Italian tour was finished, however, and in the early
summer she arrived in London.

  NO. 5 HEWSON STREET--WANREY STREET
  WALWORTH ROAD
  LONDON, July 5th, 1872

 DEAREST SISTER:

 In one way and another I imagine you must have become aware of me in
 England, although I believe I have never told you so directly. By the
 presence of a half-finished letter to you, dated March 29th, between
 Paris and Turin, Italy, I see that I cannot have written you since I
 left Germany just previous to the above-named date. This has all been
 very wrong, for I received your good and welcome letter here, via
 Berne, early in June. You know me as neither abundant nor graceful
 in apologies, although it never hurts my spirit to ask pardon, and
 your good intuition will perceive this rather extraordinary sheet of
 note-paper to signify contrition, confession, and serious effort at
 amendment. For all the interesting details contained in your letter
 I thank you very much. They constitute my only landmarks of the old
 coast for months; my explorers have been very silent and my scouts
 brought small tidings.

 I remember that I wrote you when nearly blind. I had used my eyes
 too hard, and at night, which I ought to have known I could not do
 with impunity. I passed some very dull weeks, very green and shady,
 with _exceedingly_ long nights; although after the greater pain and
 nervous excitement was over, I wrote a great deal with them closely
 bandaged. This helped to pass the time, but Mr. and Mrs. Sheldon,
 who were in London, became altogether dissatisfied with this state
 of things, and determined to put an end to some of it by coming
 after me and taking me, willing or not, to London. They had given me
 a short notice and ordered me to pack my knapsack, while they came
 down the Rhine. I obeyed, and, after a visit of a couple of days, we
 set out _via_ Strassburg and Paris. I was infinitely better by this
 time; still must not put any close strain upon my eyes. I made my
 “good-byes” in Strassburg, which was not an easy thing for the “soul,”
 and, on reaching Paris, we met a family party of Americans, friends
 of the Sheldons, that had just left London for a trip of six weeks
 through Italy. There were four of them, Mr. and Mrs. Holmes and their
 only daughter and son-in-law, Mr. and Mrs. Taylor. Mr. Holmes was
 the American Commissioner to the Great International Exhibition in
 London in 1862 and in Paris in 1867, and with his family has resided
 in London and Paris since, as American representative of science,
 skill, invention, etc. They were fine travelers, Italy was a familiar
 route to them, and it entered their heads to attach me to their party.
 I felt it to be a great piece of temerity on my part to think of
 dropping “sans cérémonie” plump into the middle of an elegant family
 party arranged for a private travel, and I said so, and said all I
 could, but all was overruled, and even Mrs. Sheldon said “go.” It was
 “too good an opportunity to lose,” she said, and added at the end of
 her advice, “What a fool I am. I always did give up all that I wanted
 most”; and so we separated in the streets of Paris, March 28th, five
 o’clock in the afternoon, she for London and I for Italy. I had only
 a little hand satchel, having stored all my European luggage with my
 Paris bankers till my return. I have never written up my trip, so I
 cannot give it you, but if I can recall the days a little in order
 will try to account for some of them. I will draw hard upon my memory,
 which will probably help me accurately to whatever she will help me at
 all, she being, not so generally treacherous as repudiatory. I wonder
 if that is an English word--it _ought_ to be; if not, I can only plead
 two years’ life in _Germany_, and surely out of all that I must have
 earned the right to manufacture one word.

 As sightseers, it was not, of course, our policy to travel at night,
 and we did it only twice, of which the first night was one. The road
 between Paris and Macon, just above Lyons, being as familiar to each
 one of us, as that between New York and Washington, we could afford
 to miss it. Reaching Macon at sunrise, from there to Euloz and,
 passing the custom house, proving ourselves innocent of liquors and
 tobacco, we were ushered into Italy through the famous Mont Cenis
 Tunnel, eight miles under a mountain, which rises almost six thousand
 feet above the level of the sea. It is a well-laid track in the
 solid rock, well ventilated and lighted by powerful reflectors each
 half-mile. You remember that it was over Mont Cenis that Napoleon I
 constructed a road to march his armies into Italy. At ten o’clock at
 night we were at Turin. By this time I was conscious of being some
 tired; altogether I was not very strong, and, just for variety, I had
 a chill in the night, and, of course, decided to abandon my journey
 and return. But as Turin was one of the cities to be visited and
 naturally two or more days were to be given it, I could afford to wait
 and watch further developments. My chill did not recur, and, although
 I continued weak for some time, I kept on the journey.

 Turin is a charming city, by far the most modern in appearance of
 anything in Italy, well laid out, fine broad streets, excellent
 markets, abounding in _fruit_, clean, and entirely free from beggary.
 It seems also to have no poor quarter, the general practice being
 for every wealthy family to take into its service and care one,
 two, or more entire families, lodging them in tenements fitted in
 the attic stories of their own residences, rather than below on the
 streets, thus at the same time holding surveillance and compelling
 _respectability_. I liked the plan. I don’t know if it is one of
 Victor Emmanuel’s ideas. You know that Turin was always his Capital
 residence, till a few years ago, when he established himself at
 Florence, which now is in turn abandoned for Rome. It has over one
 hundred churches, very rich in jewels and antiquities. I remember
 in the Metropolitan Church to have seen the marble figure, sitting,
 lifelike, of Marie Adelaide, the wife of Victor Emmanuel, and mother
 of Princess Clothilde of France. The private jewels of the church were
 shown us (for a consideration--everything in Italy is displayed for a
 consideration), but for no consideration could I undertake to describe
 them; images of solid silver, men and women, weighing hundreds of
 pounds and covered with jewels, where sometimes one was of greater
 value than the massive silver image it adorned. The Royal Palace was
 most magnificent; the rooms were all shown. Here, in this gilded salon
 where their busts stand, were married Princess Clothilde, and the
 Queen of Portugal. The plate-glass mirrors are twenty feet high, and
 everything accords with them. The armory contains an entire gallery of
 mounted knights in armor, full dress, horses like life, armed to the
 teeth, and among them lies the sword that Napoleon used at Marengo.
 Above the city is a fine old monastery to which we climbed for a
 view of Mont Blanc, Monte Rosa, and all the chain of southern Alps,
 snow-white and dazzling, stretching away into the eternal blue.

 On the second of April, Tuesday, we took train for Milan, riding for
 hours in the bright spring sunshine of northern Italy, the Alps behind
 us, and the Apennines before, the wheat waving in all the freshness
 of early green, and the vines just bursting into leaf. Here at Milan,
 we were met by a young lady protégée of Mr. Holmes, a young American
 girl who is to come out soon as a prima donna. She is finishing her
 musical studies in Milan, and, while we were installed at an excellent
 hotel, our dinners were always with Mademoiselle Katrina.

 The great sight of Milan is its cathedral, the second in size and
 magnificence in Europe; this also I could not justly describe. It is
 built entirely of marble, commenced in the thirteenth or fourteenth
 century and, like all these old massive structures, never finished.
 It covers many acres, and seems to be one sea of turrets rising at
 irregular heights toward the clouds. Although the comparison would be
 most inelegant, I will say that it reminded me of a shipping-yard,
 where the marble turrets and statues take the place of thousands of
 masts; indeed, if my memory serve me well, it has 135 spires, and 1923
 statues on the outside from the ground to the top and 700 inside.
 There is on one of the roofs, which you pass as you ascend (far above
 to the top), an entire flower garden in marble, hundreds of flowers
 forming minarets, and no two flowers carved alike or representing the
 same flower. It was a long way to the top, which at length was gained
 after many times of sitting, and (for me) even lying down to rest
 on the various roofs passed in leading from one flight of stairs to
 another, roofs of pure white marble polished and glistening in the
 sunshine like the crust of the snowbanks on the New England hills on
 bright winter days. (_I wonder_ if I ever will see them again.) Here
 again we saw marvelous jewels, “gold, silver, and precious stones.”
 The tomb of Carlo, who “stayed the plague,” is in a chapel beneath;
 the coffin and even the roof of the chapel are of solid silver; mass
 is held here each morning, and on certain days of the year miracles
 are wrought. There are many sacred relics in the cathedral, as several
 nails from the Cross, the Virgin’s shroud, and a seamless coat of the
 Lord Jesus Christ, etc., etc. The picture _galleries_ were especially
 fine, many celebrated originals, among which is Leonardo da Vinci’s
 “Last Supper of the Master and Disciples” in the original fresco. And
 the celebrated “Ambrosian Library,” so old and rare its volumes were
 indeed a curiosity--illustrated volumes of the fourth century. And
 the Royal Palace erected on the site of the old palace of the early
 Dukes of Lombardy, where Attila thundered about in his destruction.
 Later this _Palace_, like nearly all in Italy, had been at some time
 or another occupied by Napoleon I. Here was his bedchamber, unchanged,
 decorated in scarlet and gold, heavy velvet curtains richly wrought
 in flowers of pure fine gold thread. Then the celebrated _theater_
 “La Scala,” the largest in the world, its stage one hundred feet in
 depth, and wide in proportion, and this, not including the recesses.
 The pit alone holds eleven hundred people, and there are six rows
 of galleries; one hundred musicians in the orchestra; the principal
 boxes are purchased by the nobility for the season, a single box from
 four hundred to five hundred dollars (the season). I name all these
 particulars for Vester’s benefit; he may be interested in the facts.
 Our young prima donna stepped upon the stage (as our visit was in the
 daytime) and sang to us; she had sung there before to an audience of
 five thousand, but I think she took just as much pains for us, and
 I am sure we were not less enthusiastic. I expect some day to hear
 her sing when she is _famous_, but it will never afford me greater
 pleasure than when she sang to her audience of five in the great
 “Scala” of Milan.

 One little incident, happening not long before, was so pretty that I
 am tempted to tell it you. “Katrina” (who is of German parents, but
 born and always lived in New York) had only been led before the public
 once,--i.e., last winter she was the “leading lady” of the first opera
 in Turin,--and on the evening of the close of the engagement she was
 “called out” to sing a little national air, in which she had been
 exceedingly popular. When she stepped before the curtain she found the
 entire house a _blaze of light_, which at first nearly “upset” her,
 but, gathering up, she went through her air, to the last strain, when
 four men entered and placed at her feet an enormous bouquet of the
 choicest flowers, nearly four feet across. She managed to accept it,
 but attached to it was a note which requested her, when it should be
 faded, before throwing it away to open it with care, and at the end
 of a week this was done, and hidden among the flowers were found a
 magnificent gold watch and chain, pins, necklaces of coral, turquoises
 and pearls, bracelets and rings, which I could not enumerate. It had
 been ordered and arranged in Geneva, and sent all the way through
 the mountain passes to her. I thought this was a pretty success for
 the début of a little American girl, studying in a strange land with
 little money. As a child she used to sing in New York with Patti.

 But you must be tired of Milan, and wish I would hasten on if I am
 going. Well, I will, and so imagine this to be Saturday the 6th of
 April, 9 o’clock A.M., and I just taking the train eastward. The
 day was so lovely, so full of the springtime, the grass and grain
 so green, the swinging vines swaying over all the fields, the birds
 literally bursting their little throats, the fields filled with
 peasants in gay dress working to merry tunes, and when you could draw
 the eyes away from these near scenes they fell to the northward, first
 upon a line of dim, hazy blue, but over this, skirting the horizon
 again, the whole chain, peak after peak, of ranging Alps, such an
 unbroken line of glittering snow--here on the south only four miles
 away the field of Solferino where France lost one thousand officers in
 a day.

 At 4 P.M. we were at “Verona” wondering if we should see its
 “gentlemen” and giving certainly more than our usual interest to this
 subject, and at five we halted at a singular dépôt, with no rattle
 of cabs, or hacks, no tramping of horses, still as death all about
 us, and as we walked out there lay waiting us hundreds of gondolas,
 black as a pall, some covered, some open, all drawn up to the side
 of the Canal to take us weary travelers to _our hotels_. This was,
 indeed, novel, but we selected our _carriage_, stepped in with our
 luggage, sat down, and, leaning lazily back, left it to our gondolier
 to pick his way through the watery streets, some wide, some narrow,
 leading into and out of each other, like veritable city streets and
 lanes, the ways on each side lined perfectly thick with old palaces
 and majestic buildings of centuries ago, their fronts to the sea and
 their magnificent stone steps leading directly into the water, and
 when one would pay a call, the gondolier had only to bring his boat
 alongside and you stepped out as from another carriage to the steps of
 a mansion. We were taken to “Hotel Victoria,” made as comfortable as
 a first-class Italian hotel can make one, and after supper commenced
 upon the sights. Ah, but there was so much to see, not that it is
 a city of enterprise, a flourishing mart of trade or business. Oh,
 no, far from it. Venice only exists upon the record of its former
 greatness; take all this away and the travelers consequent upon it
 and I believe twelve months would find a famine there, but there is
 little danger of this while Byron and Shakespeare remain bright in
 English literature.

 Here, as everywhere in Italy, one must commence with the cathedral,
 and having gone through this, and some scores of churches, the “Campo
 Santo” and the Bell Tower, one is at liberty to enter upon the
 palaces, gardens, and theaters. But Venice offers some deviations
 from this general rule; most cities have prisons, but they have not
 all the dungeons of Saint Marc. All have bridges, but all have not a
 “Rialto” nor a “Bridge of Sighs.” I suspect I do not need to remind
 _you_ of many old or historical facts. You who are always digging into
 the past will have them all “papered and labeled” and stored away
 ready for use. But I might mention the seventy-two little islands upon
 which Venice was built, which were only a part of the Adriatic, and
 not reckoned as land at all. A set of not warlike people from here and
 there in the vicinity, having grown weary and afraid of their fighting
 and troublesome neighbors, mostly from Austria, determined to place
 themselves in a position more difficult to attack, came far over the
 sea to these little islands and commenced a city, and gave a general
 invitation to all war-pestered, peace-loving citizens of the world
 to come and join them; from time to time they united their islands,
 built their houses for dwelling and trade upon the streets laid down
 upon the piles, with one side opening upon the street of earth and the
 opposite upon the sea, as I have before described. But--_the depravity
 of human nature_!! No sooner were they a little strong and comfortable
 themselves than they sent out their ships to prey upon and plunder
 their neighbors, and well-nigh ravaged the cities of the earth. They
 decorated their palaces with the spoils of other nations, married
 the sea, and declared themselves Omnipotent and Divine. Among other
 things their religion and church must have a Hero, and they sent afar,
 and got (as they said) the body of Saint Mark, brought it, and great
 numbers of relics belonging to him, buried it with the divinest honors
 in their principal church, and named it Saint Mark, or “San Marco.”
 This was as early as the ninth century. It is a large but not handsome
 edifice, facing a paved court, a “piazza” some six hundred feet in
 length, surrounded by palaces, now used for public purposes, stores,
 etc. All the world of Venice walks in the “Piazza of San Marco.” The
 pigeon was esteemed a sacred bird with them, and he is still cherished
 here and treated with great honor. One of the curiosities to be seen
 are the “pigeons of San Marco.” I cannot at this moment recollect
 definitely enough to state to you how many hundreds are supposed to
 reside in the immediate vicinity, but their dinner hour is two o’clock
 in the afternoon. The great bell of the clock strikes three quarters
 past one and they commence wheeling and circling into the court, they
 cover the fronts of all the buildings, sit as thickly as possible
 upon every window seat, hang in all the cornices, and stand in full
 platoons in every foot of spare pavement for a number of rods around
 the especial corner where their dinner is served. A young man (it was
 formerly a young girl) is appointed by the Government as feeder of
 the pigeons. It is not necessary to say that he is punctual with his
 repast--he could not live with his tumultuous boarders if he were not.
 As the bell strikes two, he pours the grain from--

The rest of this letter is missing, but from this time on her letters
became frequent, and we are able to follow her, almost day by day.

Her health by this time was much improved. She established pleasant
lodgings in London, where her old friends the Sheldons and her new
friends the Taylors were, and followed her lifelong habits by rising
at five o’clock in the morning and getting in four and a half hours’
activity before any one else in the house appeared for breakfast.
She heard Stanley, who had just returned from Africa, and, in the
controversy which ensued between him and the Geographical Society, she
became a warm partisan of Stanley. Antoinette Margot joined her. She,
too, had lived through the war without breaking down, but, when she
had nothing to do but to sit down at Carlsruhe and paint, she gave way
to nervous overstrain. Mrs. Taylor found her Italian trip rather too
much for her and wanted a quiet place outside of London, so they rented
a summer home in the Isle of Wight and there spent some restful and
health-giving weeks. For a company of nervous invalids, they appear
to have had a very merry time. The following jingle was written in
London in 1872 for reading at a social gathering of a few families and
America’s friends, who met once a week for social intercourse over a
cup of tea and light refreshments, enlivened by recitations.

The family names are somewhat significant--Mr. and Mrs. Holmes, Mr. and
Mrs. Taylor, Mr. and Mrs. Bacon, Mr. and Mrs. Darling, and Mrs. Cynthia
Care, a friend then absent.

Mr. Taylor was the inventor of the McKean drill.

  Since time commenced its cycles, or the memory of man
  Hath record or tradition of pastoral tribe or clan,
  They have never failed to chronicle that men from far and near
  Have met to sharp or blunt their wits in liquor, wine or beer.
  This ancient custom, reaching back into the hoary past,
  Wears a dignity and prestige that rivals even caste;
  And bold are they who dare to meet in social gathering free,
  And call not to the festal board one of the classic three.
  But here’s a jolly company, from far across the sea,
  Dares tune its mirth and sharp its wit in a cup of good Bohea.
  We’re here from many hundred miles, where the western ocean foams,
  But, though a paradox it seems, we have not left our Holmes.

  The _social_ homes of England draw us to her like a band,
  For we are but the children of this true old glorious land.
  Of the “_merry homes_” of England our great-grandsires used to tell,
  But with pride and joy we prove it here, that we’ve Merry Holmes as
   well.
  Disclaiming all comparison, we write ours brave and free
  And kindly and hospitable as any Holmes can be.
  But we have very English grown, so soon we habits take on,
  We cannot even sip our tea, but we must have our Bacon.
  But English or American, it matters not a straw,
  For both hang out before the world without a taint or flaw.
  Go search through British literature, down to her Common Laws,
  And find what strength and nourishment it from its Bacon draws;
  And if you doubt America can follow in the van,
  Go test our “Cincinnati sides,” and “West Virginia ham.”
  So perfect in itself is each, it’s patent to my mind
  The choicest Bacons that can be, are just the two combined.

  By the watery distance we have come one might judge us merely sailors,
  But we’re nae thoughtless nor improvident, for we’ve even bro’t our
   Taylors.
  One doesn’t know how long ago, the unjust trick began
  To stigmatize a tailor as the ninth part of a man;
  But though as old and honored as the Judge’s wig and gown,
  Before the faithless falsehood I throw my gauntlet down:
  Yes, tho’ it was with Adam for the modest blush that came
  When he sewed his scanty fig leaves, and dropped his head for shame;
  Tho’ old as this--and thick, and black, and firm as granite, too,
  We’ll drill it to a honeycomb, and let the daylight through.
  So lay upon our Taylor here your nicest chalk-line true,
  And measure him, in soul and vim, as he would measure you;
  You’ll find, Sir Scandal, when you’ve done the best you ever can,
  In reach of thought, and breadth, and depth, he’s every inch a man.
  What did I say? I’m wrong--crave grace--to err is ever human--
  Ah, with what pride of sex I claim, his better half a woman--
  Tho’ fair Fidele and tender she walketh by his side,
  He can neither make nor mend her, but hold fast in his pride;
  And though no mortal’s meeker, we find from far and wide
  The best and wisest seek her, for a pattern and a guide.
  And does the critic here step in, and call us frozen-hearted,
  And lacking in paternal love, that we so long are parted
  From clinging dear ones left to pine like caged and crying starlings?
  Hold, sir! Here’s ointment for your wrath, for we have bro’t our
   Darlings.
  We hold them very near us, with tender love and true;
  Their happiness and welfare are never from our view;
  And though we’re willing sometimes that they abroad should roam,
  We would not spare our darlings forever from our home.

  There’s one, methinks, whose eloquence erst charmed this happy band,
  Who stays away through many a day in a sunny foreign land--
  Who lingered where the soft moonlight plays through the Colosseum,
  And troops of idle beggars wait for strangers’ hands to fee ’em.
  Or where the setting sun goes down on Monte Rosa’s crest,
  And hoary Blanc bids grand good-night to the cloudlets in the west,
  And who strays even now, ’mong the vines and the trees,
  And walks the green slopes of the dark Pyrenees.
  Given us to be jurors and judge of this action,
  We’d reduce this delay to a very small fraction;
  But being quite powerless our cause to defend,
  We must learn to endure what we cannot amend.

  As the best of a bad case, let’s forgive her, shall we,
  And drink to her health in a cup of Bohea?

  And now for our bumpers but one greeting waits
  While we roll back our thoughts to the United States,
  For United as one they must ever remain,
  Since the blood of a million hath rusted the chain.
  With a link in each hand died the true and the brave,
  And sunk side by side in the low martyr’s grave.
  Their bones rest in peace ’neath the soil of their love,
  While their souls keep calm watch on the ramparts above.
  We would hide nae her faults, this dear land of our pride;
  We know she has errors on many a side;
  She’s restless, impatient, hurries on through her day,
  And treads on old customs that lie in her way.
  She’s bold in her speech, but there’s nae lack of truth,
  And her faults, let us hope, are the failings of youth.
  Yes, she’s young--oh, so young--and her robes are so bright,
  For she’s made herself gay with the stars of the night,
  And thrown o’er her shoulders a mantle of light
  That the oppressed of all nations keep ever in sight.
  Oh! each grasp the tissue that floats on the wind,
  For hid in its folds lie the hopes of mankind!
  Oh! guard Thou her ways, Great Eternal Lord God;
  Let her meekly but safely pass under thy rod!

  With her faults and her virtues we trust her to Thee
  And drink to her life in our cups of Bohea.

  CLARA BARTON




CHAPTER IV

RETURNING HOME


It would be pleasant to record that the benefits derived from this
happy outing on the Isle of Wight proved permanent, but unfortunately
that was not the case. Had Clara returned to America in the autumn,
it might have been better, but she went back to London for the winter
determined to brave its fogs. She had discovered, with many of her
countrymen, that it is a mistake to expect relief from cold weather
by going to a warm climate. The people who live in warm climates do
not know how to prepare for the cold. In London they knew at least the
value of a fire. To London she went, and the results were depressing.
Her throat and chest were affected badly by the London fogs. All the
gains of previous months seemed to have been lost, and she was as far
from well as she was at the end of the Franco-Prussian War. At this
time she wrote to Mrs. Vassall, who had returned from Washington and
was living in Worcester:

  LONDON, July 11, 1873
  EUSTON ROAD

  DEAREST FANNIE:

 Your dear good letter and that of your “Bear” came a few days ago. It
 is funny to be interviewed at that distance, and I am glad that you
 got no worse reports than you did. I don’t think I am so homesick as
 it would seem, but I am weak, and little things seem such a burden to
 me that it hinders me from doing many things that would make me more
 at ease if they could be done. However, one must be patient; it is not
 a month yet that I was in my bed most of the day, and now I can go
 about town, and even once have been _out_ of town, but not for a long
 trip.

 It is kind of you all to offer to come to help me, but I believe I
 shall be able to get over my difficulties without giving so much
 trouble to any one. By “getting over them,” I mean measurably over
 them. I cannot say that I even hope to be strong again as I was before
 this last illness. I cannot tell, but it would be a wonder to me if
 sufficient nervous strength returns to permit any degree of _real_
 usefulness. The greatest trouble I meet now is to bear the little
 burdens of contact with the persons and things around me, and not
 show too plainly that I have not strength and composure to bear them
 calmly; in short, to “hold my horses,” You, dear Fannie, will know
 what that means, and how to the weak the grasshopper becomes a burden.
 I am glad you have found a physician who has some strength for you,
 if it is really so; but I must confess that my previously small share
 of confidence in medical aid and wisdom has not increased by the last
 year’s experience.

 I hear of you in the most trying heat at home. It is just warm in
 England some days, but to-day, for instance, ladies are generally
 clothed in wool suits and a shawl. I went out just now for a few
 minutes with Mamie, while our rooms were put in order, and came back
 because I was too cold, and it is never very bright in London. I
 suppose this has its due influence on one’s nervous system, and I
 would have been glad at any time within the last month to be made
 ready and go over to France or Germany. I think it would be better,
 but I could not get strong enough to _get ready_ and go. You wonder
 what “getting ready” means. It seems to you that it requires little
 preparation to put up a bag or small trunk of things and cross the
 Channel, and so it does, but it is summer, and I have several trunks
 of mainly woolen things for this cool climate. My little strength
 since I have been in Europe has made it necessary to have them, of
 course, unpacked, and in a state of utter confusion, for some trunks
 I have not had my hand in for months and months, but to others I
 constantly go, and in haste. The _moths_ in London are like flies in
 abundance. It wouldn’t mend my nerves to know I had gone off traveling
 and left all I have to be devoured, and I have been made worse several
 times by simply attempting to get a dress or some little article from
 a trunk. My weak chest will not admit of the least labor of the arms
 yet. Let Mamie do it? Mamie is only a weak little girl, and until
 lately could not have packed her own trunk without harm to herself. So
 I wait for strength as an army waits for quartermaster and commissary
 supplies before it can march. I made one little trial or two, to see
 what I could do. Papa Holmes (with whose family I went to Italy) came
 one day to ask me if I could go to Liverpool where he was going, and
 over into Wales, and pass a week. It was about the time Colonel Hinton
 was going to sail, and I thought, with so many good friends on the
 road, I might try it. So I went as far as Stratford-on-Avon, but I
 grew so tired I gave out and let the party go on and I came home. It
 wasn’t much of a journey,--only a few hours,--but I found it quite
 sufficient.

 It is really quite astonishing what those sleeping fellows tell, and
 how they look us all through! I don’t think I am so homesick, if that
 is the term they give it, but no one knows--only those who have tried
 it--what the depressing atmosphere of London may be to one who is not
 strong, and more especially to one who feels he is never to leave it,
 as I expected last winter. I think I could have faced the prospect
 of the dark river with a stouter heart if I had been strengthened
 by a few glimpses of sunlight sometimes, but I waited such months
 watching my little window panes for a patch of sky over which one
 could discover that a cloud _moved_, but the surface was never light
 and thin enough for this. It was as immovable as a sheet of zinc; one
 felt himself already in a metallic coffin, only waiting to be closed
 in a little snugger, and have the screws turned down. But I have
 tried to be cheerful and as full of life and fun as I could be, with
 so little ability to speak as I have had, and it _may_ be that you
 and your Mamma Sally’s sleeping men see deeper and get nearer to the
 reality than those about me, or than perhaps even I am well aware of.
 It is possible I have at times succeeded in cheating myself a little;
 all the better if it is so. I should be glad to be spared the trial
 of going on to the continent of Europe again. I am _so tired_ of it,
 I never want to see it again, but it may be best, and then _Mamie
 ought_ not to leave Europe without going there. I should be sorry to
 embark her for America having seen only poor smoky old London. If
 some one of our friends had been coming over, with whom I could have
 sent her to journey some, I should have been very glad of it. I can
 perhaps arrange it from here, but up to the present moment I have not
 been able to find the right opportunity. I thank you very much, dear
 Fannie, for all your interest and care, and hope I may never find a
 chance to repay it in the same manner.

  Afternoon

 Mr. Sheldon has just drawn a letter out of his pocket and, looking
 very wise, announced to me that he had just commenced a correspondence
 with a very pleasant lady of Worcester and, showing the envelope,
 _I_ judged the correspondence had been commenced with the lady’s
 _husband_. But I read it, and became convinced that it was from the
 lady herself. He informed me that he had replied at the earliest
 moment, and it happened to be just when they had succeeded in pushing
 me off for my trip, so he had an opportunity to talk large, but he had
 scarce time to answer until I was back, and he waited a day or two to
 see if he might show your letter to me.

 I hope Ber will have had an opportunity to hear direct from me, as I
 gave his Boston address to Colonel Hinton, who promised to see him if
 he could find him. I have seen no one who was going to Worcester or
 I would have sent him to you. As for me, I shall try to go home this
 autumn, I suppose. America will at all events be as well as here,
 and has a greater range of climate with easier travel. As for the
 prospects of a full recovery of my original health (i.e., previous to
 last winter) I cannot decide yet. I may, when once out of this climate
 and atmosphere in which I have fallen, recover at once and fully;
 and I may never be able to throw off the effects of such prolonged
 prostration. My own opinion inclines strongly to the latter. I do not
 think any one need come to see me home; I should be sorry to give that
 trouble to any one, and will do my best to get on by myself. And now,
 with a kiss and great love to all, and the best to your own dear self,
 I am as ever

  Yours

  CLARA


To Fannie’s husband, Bernard Barton Vassall, the “Ber” or “Bear” of her
playful letters, she had already written:

  5 HEUSEN ST., WANSEY ST.
  WALWORTH ROAD, LONDON, April 8, 1873

  MY DEAR GOOD BOY BER:

 I cannot tell you how good and kind it was of you to hasten to write
 me as soon as you knew I had need of a word of sympathy; neither can
 I tell how it did me good and made me better and stronger. I was so
 weak and ill that day. It came at night with one from your mother,
 and they were the first words of sympathy that had come to me from
 the old home. I almost hesitate to tell you how long I held them
 in my hands. I looked at them till they were damp with fever and
 perspiration before I opened them and kept saying softly to myself,
 “There’s something good for me in there; there are good kind words
 and sympathy.” I waited still and held them close till I got a little
 accustomed to them, and then I got raised up a little in my hot bed
 and read them all through and through, and Mamie read them all to
 me again. How they helped me on after that worst and weakest and
 hardest of all the days I have passed in all this illness! It seemed
 providential that they should come just then. It was not my cough
 that was holding me so low at that moment. I don’t know if in all I
 have written your mother, I have ever told her _how_ I got a part
 of my illness. I had two physicians, one daily and one consulting
 occasionally. He came one day in early March, and recommended me to
 be taken out of bed and bathed in water each day, put back awhile,
 then taken up and dressed. I could not stand alone, but this was done
 two days. I had only my cough then, but the third morning after the
 bathing and “gaping” I couldn’t straighten a limb. It proved to be
 inflammatory rheumatism from my body to my toes; then in two weeks a
 relapse and a rheumatic fever set in, which was at its height when
 your letters arrived. But the port wine broke the fever and I am
 nearly past the effects of the rheumatism, have little or no pain,
 and my cough is not dangerous now, I am sure; I sleep pretty well for
 me, and I eat good substantial food. Now, if I can hold fast to all
 these improvements, I cannot think it will be necessary for any person
 to leave home and business to come to me. I could not be come _for_
 at present, for I should not dare attempt the voyage yet, and I hope
 to be able to get along by myself, especially as it is almost summer
 now. But, dear Ber, I think every moment how good and kind it was of
 you to say you _would_ come if I needed you, and if I should “go to
 the bad” again, I fear I shall need you. If such a miserable state of
 things comes, I will telegraph, and you will all consult, and do what
 seems best to you to do. You know much better than I what would be
 well to do, and, if it must be done, you will do it. Doesn’t the State
 want to send you over to make some investigations? In that case it
 wouldn’t seem such waste of ammunition on small game as to come just
 to look after poor miserable me, who never amount to anything anywhere.

 But, Ber, I _shall never have done_ thinking how quick and kind you
 were in writing me, and what strength and purpose I felt in every line
 of your letter, and it strengthens me still. You saw so clearly how I
 needed a strong arm near me; all about me is _so weak_. I have managed
 everything since my illness, for myself, and all around me, from my
 banking business and correspondence to my butcher and grocer, the
 airing of my linen, and the arranging of the chairs in my room. There
 is no mind or will or thought that can go one inch beyond me, when I
 stop. There is no hand that has enough magnetic force to take away one
 nervous twinge, not a hand that does not take magnetism from me even
 now, and days when I am weakest, I cannot let a hand be laid upon me,
 to rub, or even comb my hair. I feel the loss of strength directly and
 fall into nervous perspiration. I tell you all this because I read
 between the lines of your dear letter that you half divined the case,
 and I may as well confess it. I believe I can bring myself up out of
 this weakness, and then I will come home to thank you, and be “put in
 my little bed.” Won’t you write me again soon, now you know how it
 does me good?

 Dear Fannie offers her “Bear” to me,--what a good Bearess she is,
 isn’t she? Now, dear Ber, with a great big kiss, and I can’t say that
 there aren’t a few other little things dropped along with it, here, my
 good boy, is my good-bye.

  From Your Old Sick Auntie

  CLARA

 Ber, you must hold your good mother steady and not let her get
 alarmed. It will never do for her to come all this way on such an
 errand. In any case it would be _too hard_ for her.

Though neither medicine nor the climate availed to help her, she found
some measure of relief in a cheerful spirit. Of her system of mental
therapeutics she wrote to her niece Mamie Barton, Mrs. John Stafford:

 Auntie wants to write Mamie a little letter. She is more sorry than
 she can tell that she has such a stupid illness that forbids her to be
 company for any one.

 Auntie does not feel less social for this and, although it is hard
 and painful, she will not feel despondent a moment, but hopeful and
 cheerful for the present and future, if the circumstances immediately
 about her do not combine to depress her to a degree which she _cannot_
 control. If she had a headache or a nervous head which a noise would
 disturb or make ache, there would be some good reason for all about
 her to keep quiet, and leave her to her rest and reflections; but she
 has nothing of this, and never has. Her head is strong physically.
 (She will not refer to its mental qualities.) And as she has nothing
 to do all night but to rest and reflect, she does not need special
 opportunity for these during the day. If she were all alone, she
 would not get lonely or nervous on account of the quiet and silence
 about her. She has had great experiences in this and is accustomed
 to it. But when she feels herself imposing a dull dead silence on
 all persons about her, those whom she loves most dearly and for
 whose hourly comfort and happiness she would sacrifice anything in
 reason and see her dear little girls gliding about without speaking a
 sentence,--never sees a laugh or scarce a smile,--it makes her feel
 herself such a restriction, such a detractor from their happiness
 and leaves her such a prey to sad reflections and makes her feel the
 misfortune of her illness so deeply that at times it seems impossible
 to bear it. She grows more and more depressed every minute and the
 poor strained nerves refuse longer control, and, in spite of all her
 womanly determination, break into tears and groans. This would make me
 very ill in time. Mamie doesn’t want this of all things, Auntie knows,
 and she writes this poor little letter to explain to her the causes
 and the results, and tell her how to avoid the one and improve the
 other.

 Just, then, throw away the old-time, never-to-be-departed-from notion,
 handed down from nobody knows where, that all ill or ailing persons
 are to be treated the same, and that mainly like a dead person,
 surrounded by dumb watchers, and dim tapers, waiting to be buried,
 and remember that one whose heart is cheery and one whose mind is
 active, but whose mouth is closed to speech, might like to borrow
 the use of the mouths of those around them--might and must want,
 most of all, some one to talk for them--to say the nonsense and make
 the fun they cannot say and make for themselves. And that nothing
 so much as a good funny time a day would so shorten and deaden the
 pain that must be borne in either case. Now, if the two dear good
 little girls could only bring themselves to have the same chatty day
 that Auntie knows they would have if they were in their own room by
 themselves, laughing, singing, doing nonsense, and, in short, feeling
 themselves perfectly free to enjoy themselves as I always know they
 do when by themselves, Auntie would be more grateful to them than for
 anything else they could do for her. And she has faith in the good
 understanding of her dear Mamie, to believe that she still sees the
 real state of the case as she could _not_ see it before. And she knows
 that once she sees it, that big lump of Benevolence just on the top
 of her head, will not permit her to do anything but have a good jolly
 time in spite of her disagreeable old Auntie who can’t just now help a
 bit to make it, but who needs it more than ever, and most of all.

 Mamie needn’t work on that old puzzling dress unless she _greatly
 desires_ to.

 Now, with great love, and great hopes, and sincere commiseration,
 Auntie closes this her first epistle to the daughter of David and
 waiting to hear her cry out in a “loud voice,” she remains as usual

  OLD DOLOROUS


The summer, however, did her some good. She was able to get out and do
a little sight-seeing, her longest journey being to Stratford-on-Avon.
Early in October she sailed for home on the steamship Parthia.

Only a few weeks before she had believed that she had but a short time
to live, or that if she lived it must be as a hopeless and permanent
invalid; but with even the beginning of a restoration to health she
recalled her determination to introduce in America the Red Cross,
under whose auspices she had labored on the battle-fields of Europe.
She knew that America had no knowledge of, or interest in, the Red
Cross. She had good reason to question whether it would be possible for
her immediately to stir up any great enthusiasm for it. But she was
determined to live and bring this to pass.

As usual on trans-Atlantic voyages, there was a concert in the cabin
of the Parthia. Clara Barton, returning to America as the heroine
of two wars, was asked to participate. She made her contribution to
the evening’s entertainment in a poem which she wrote on shipboard,
in which she expressed her ardent desire and her solicitude. She was
going back to America after a long absence. Was there anything for her
to do when she got here? For daily bread she had no concern and no
need for concern. Her modest income was adequate for her still more
modest needs. Even while traveling abroad she had found no occasion to
encroach upon her principal, and her expenses at home were certain to
leave her each year a little margin between income and outgo. But there
had entered into her soul a vision of the contribution which she might
be permitted to make to America and the world by securing America’s
adhesion to the international treaty which included the recognition of
the Red Cross. Would America listen to her when she pleaded for this?
Had it room for her and her mission?


HAVE YE ROOM?

  Five days from New York--five days did he say?
    Only five days from the glistening bay,
  That four years ago I sailed tearfully o’er
    Watching the sunny light fade from the shore!
  As the kerchiefs had faded along the dense pier,
    And the God bless you’s died on the listening ear.
  Tearfully, prayerfully, sailing away,
    Past the green islands, and out of the bay,
  Recalling in pain they who sorrowed and wept,
    More painfully still the brave who had slept;
  Tearfully, prayerfully sailing away
    In search of the strength that went out in the fray.

  It were easy to search for the gems of the sea,
    The jewels and gold hid in mountain and lea,
  The thin veins of silver that line the green sod,
    But health is of wisdom, and strength is of God.
  Four wearisome years in lands strange and old,
    Watching the changes that over them rolled,
  How the calm shadows lay in the valley of rest,
    And the black war cloud gathered from out of the west;
  How lancer and _tireur_ dashed o’er the plain
    And the smiles fled the face of sweet Alsace-Lorraine.
  And helmet and turban lay soaked in the rain
    And the masterless dog lapped the wounds of the slain.
  Fair sons and brave husbands there lingered not one,
    And the far childless widow prayed--Thy will be done.

  How the old nations groaned on their unstable beds,
    As the great car of progress rolled over their heads,
  Uprooting old forms, time-honored of sages
    Sowing new truths for the incoming ages.
  Republics have sprung on the steps of the throne,
    Kingdoms have crumbled, empires have grown;
  Princes and prelates have listened their doom,
    And ermine and gold-decked the refugee’s tomb.

  Strange sights for strange eyes as the old cities burn,
    And battle and siege follow each in their turn.
  I have heard the faint note of the last sentry’s call,
    And seen the white flag flutter out o’er the wall;
  I have bound up death wounds lying dark and alone,
    And the language that blessed me was strange and unknown.
  The homeless and famished clung wild with despair,
    And the noble and gentle have cherished me there.
  Still trustingly,--loyally: loving and true,
    Anxious and glad, I am coming to you.
  Have ye place, each beloved one, a place in your prayer,
    Have ye _room_, my dear countrymen, room for me there?

  How the strength rose and fell in those perilous years!
    What torture it made of my hopes and my fears,
  When I joyed in its rise or wept for its fall,
    It was never myself that I thought of at all.
  But if only once more I might tread the loved land,
    And toil for its weal with my heart, and my hand;
  Have ye place, each beloved one, a place in your prayer,
    Have ye _work_, my brave countrymen, work for me there?

  Plow on, old Parthia, steady and true,
    Each plunge of thy prow brings them nearer to view;
  Brings me nearer the days that shall settle the doubt
    If they’ve kept me within--or have left me without.
  For my feeble hands failed while care rested on all,
    And trouble and grief wrapped them round like a pall.
  Who shall say that the storms have not scattered my sheaves,
    Or the winter winds buried the fallen autumn leaves,
  Or the gaping seas closed without anger or frown,
    And the freighted ships crowd where the lone wreck went down?
  _Have_ ye place, each beloved one, a place in your prayer,
    Have ye _room_, my dear countrymen, room for me there?

  STEAMSHIP PARTHIA, MID-ATLANTIC
  _October 8, 1873_




CHAPTER V

THE YEARS OF SICKNESS AND RECOVERY

1873-1880


Clara Barton came back from Europe wearing the jewel of the Red Cross
presented to her by Queen Natalie of Serbia. She was the only person in
America who then, or for nine years thereafter, wore the Red Cross. She
was the sole person in the United States who, by service or any form of
official recognition, was entitled to that decoration. She wore also
the Iron Cross of Merit, presented to her by the Emperor and Empress of
Germany. She wore a Gold Cross of Remembrance, presented to her by the
Grand Duke and Duchess of Baden; and from Louise, the Grand Duchess,
she wore, and prized beyond all wealth, a magnificent amethyst, said
to have been the finest amethyst in this country. From poor, defeated
France she wore no official decoration, but she brought the love and
gratitude of innumerable people there to whom she had ministered.

On her return to America, she went to her old home in Washington, on
Pennsylvania Avenue and Capitol Hill, the home she had purchased before
leaving, but occupied so short a time before her nervous breakdown.
But she was not permitted to live there very long, because the corner
was too noisy. Her physician, Dr. Thompson, commanded her to live
elsewhere. The doctor assigned her her limits, “jail-limits” she called
them; she might live somewhere between Seventh and Sixteenth Streets,
and on the farther side of New York Avenue.

She established herself at the corner of Fourteenth and F. Her letters
to her nieces in this period are cheerful, but written under the burden
of physical pain and nerve fatigue.

On May 23 she received word that her sister Sarah, Mrs. Vester Vassall,
was fatally ill. Though far from well, she hastened to Massachusetts,
arriving in the evening to find that her sister had died that morning.
The shock of her sister’s death, coming as it did when her own health
was so precarious, brought back her old trouble with full force. For
several months she remained in Oxford and Worcester, and then went to
North Grafton--New England Village it was called--where her relatives,
the Learned family, had a country home. There she took a house, and
remained for a considerable time attended by Minnie Kupfer, who had
served with her in the Franco-Prussian War, and, like Antoinette
Margot, had followed her to this country. Her health varied with the
season and with other conditions not all of them easy to determine.
There were times when she had hard chills, followed by dripping sweats.
There were weeks when she had no strength even to lift her head. There
were bright days also, when she moved about with some approach to
health.

What was the real nature of Clara Barton’s illness during this long
period of suffering? Material is not lacking for a fairly accurate
diagnosis. Having exhausted the resources of local physicians, she
entered into correspondence with a series of doctors, each of whom
professed to be able to bring her permanent relief. Some of these
called for very little information about her condition. Their remedies
were supposed to cure almost anything. But others sent long lists
of questions calling for full and minute replies. Copies of these
questions and of her answers, she preserved.

From her replies it would appear that there was hardly a bodily
function which was not disturbed. She was subject to hard colds, to
severe headaches, a weak back, digestive trouble, and to periodic
attacks of camp diarrhœa from which so many soldiers suffered for so
many years after the war, this condition alternating with stubborn
constipation.

But it is evident, as one reads critically these pathetic catechisms,
that she had after all a basis of sound physical health. Her careful
answers to these questions do not appear to indicate a single organic
disease. She had yet to learn that her back, which she thought so weak,
was really remarkably strong, and that her head had little need to ache
when her eyes were not overstrained. And her digestion need not be
seriously disturbed if her nerves were not worn and shattered.

The most serious symptom that Clara Barton had, through all these
years, was a temperament abnormally sensitive. She was capable of
enduring almost any possible physical or nervous strain, and of
standing up under it well, but when the strain was over and she met
some trivial exhibition of ingratitude, some captious and wholly
negligible criticism, some petulant and despicable bit of opposition,
her nervous energy gave way with a sudden collapse. Her voice failed;
her eyes failed; whatever organ was weakest gave way first, and she
went to pieces like the deacon’s “one-hoss shay.”

To one who reads those letters at this distance, it seems a thousand
pities that some one, whose scientific judgment she could trust, did
not say to her: “You are organically sound. There is no good reason
why you should be sick. You are tired, and that is not surprising. And
you have magnified innumerable foolish little matters of irritation.
Forget them. Believe that you are well. Half your years are yet before
you,--the better and happier and far the more useful half of your life.
Get out in the fresh air. Live simply. Throw medicine away, and you can
be strong again.”

In an undated letter written in the early spring of 1876, she gives to
Mr. Dwight an account of her experience since her return to America:

  [Undated. 1876, early spring]

  DEAR MR. DWIGHT:

 I am at New England Village. Some good angel must have inspired you
 to write me. I was so anxious to hear of you, and only my physical
 weakness has kept me from commencing a search for you long ago. I had
 “somewhat” to say to you, as you know, and as soon as I am strong
 enough shall find a way to say it. Yes, it is true I am at New England
 Village and have been since last April.

 The “world” has not treated me badly in the last four years; but I
 could have better borne some bad treatment from others than all I have
 had to bear from myself. I have been an invalid most of the time.
 I grew very weak at Carlsruhe directly after Belfort, recovered a
 little, went to England in the spring of ’72, kept about some months,
 but in October broke down with a cough, became too ill to get off
 the island, was confined to my bed eight months; in June, ’73, was
 able to get over to Paris and recovered sufficiently to come home in
 October. My cough had left me, but I was weak, and fearing its return
 went to Washington as soon as I could for the winter, broke down again
 with “prostration of the nervous system,” if any one knows what that
 is, which was deepened and nearly rendered fatal by the illness of
 my only sister in Worcester, whom I strove for months to reach. Was
 finally brought to Worcester at the peril of my life on the 23d of
 May, ’74, arriving at 4 P.M. to find that she had died at 6 in the
 morning. I never saw her dead face even. It was one year from that
 time before I left the house again, and that to be removed here. I
 could not tell you the suffering, physical and mental, of that year,
 and I would not if I could. Only a small portion of the time could
 I stand alone; averaged less than two hours’ sleep in twenty-four
 for almost a year; could not write my name for over four months, and
 could not have a letter read to me or see my friends or scarcely my
 attendants. Little by little I have grown better until now I am about
 my house (for I always keep house). I have for attendant and nurse and
 housekeeper Miss Kupfer, of Berne, Suisse, a friend I made there, and
 who came to me as soon as she heard of my illness here a year or more
 ago and who never leaves me. I am gaining slowly, though weak still;
 have had neither physician nor medical treatment for over a year.
 Nature does her work as best she knows how; what measure of strength
 she may ever give me back I cannot know, probably not great. I suppose
 diseased nerve centers and worn-out systems are not likely to mend
 very firmly. But one day I shall want to see you, and you will let me
 do so, I think. If I am not able to go to Boston, you will come to see
 me, I believe, and when I see how it is likely to be with me I shall
 write and tell you. Meantime, it would interest me just as deeply to
 know how the world has treated you in these last few years as it does
 you to hear of me. Can I not know something of you and can I not send
 my most sincere and respectful regards to Mr. Jackson, whom I hope one
 day to see?

While Clara Barton was touring New York State on her lecture tours, she
spoke at Dansville, New York, and was entertained at the sanitarium,
popularly spoken of as the water cure. On March 16, 1876, a lady from
Worcester who had been a patient at Dansville called and spent the
greater part of a day with her. She told her that Dansville was “The
place to go and get well.” Miss Barton had resumed her diary, and she
recorded that this Miss Adams seemed to her “not an enthusiast, but a
calm, sensible girl; looks at things in the light of reason and common
sense; and I feel that I can take her reports without discount, and her
opinions on trust.”

Before many days she had practically determined to go to Dansville,
and that place became her home for about ten years. At first she lived
in the sanitarium; then she bought a home of her own. She adopted the
simple habits of life which there were inculcated. Little by little
her strength returned, until, instead of being an invalid, she was
for her years a woman in remarkably good health. With the return of
health came back her determination to establish the American Red Cross,
and it was in Dansville that the first local organization in America
was established under that name. How she secured the organization and
official recognition we shall presently learn. From her letters at this
time, two may be selected which give some account of the troubled years
through which she had passed, and the great hope which she was now
ardently cherishing. One of these was addressed to the Public Printer
at Washington, whose services she remembered kindly, and with whom she
hoped to have dealings. The other was to her cherished friend, the
Grand Duchess Louise of Baden.

  DANSVILLE, Sept. 8, 1877

  JOHN D. DE FRIEZE, ESQ.

  Public Printer, Washington, D.C.

  DEAR AND ESTEEMED SIR:

 It occurs to me that it may not be entirely necessary to introduce
 myself to you. Even after a lapse of almost a decade you will not
 quite have forgotten that there was once a woman by the name of
 Clara Barton who, in common with the rest of the moving world, gave
 you more or less trouble. However faint these traces remain in your
 memory, that cannot dim the brightness which gilds her recollection
 of the uncounted favors you so kindly and generously meted out to her
 in the hard, busy days when she tried, with little strength and less
 power, to carry heavy burdens, and accomplish hard things. Through all
 these years the grateful memory of these kindnesses has never waned,
 and it so presses itself upon me that I cannot resist the desire to
 pick up my pen, far away in this quiet nook of the country, and tell
 you how glad I am, and have been, to know you are back again at your
 old post, which you ought never to have left, and how thankful I am
 to our _good President_ for having recalled you. My first impulse
 was to thank him directly, but unfortunately he does not know of my
 existence, and could never have found an excuse for my boldness, but
 you, my good and honored friend, will excuse it and will not call it
 even bold that a hard-worked woman has remembered the strong, kind
 hands that helped her on, and after long years has ventured to speak
 of it.

 Physically these intervening years have not been easy years for me,
 four of them with broken health and a wanderer in foreign lands, two
 of them in the Franco-Prussian War and its devastations, four more
 a helpless invalid in my own country, and this year for the first,
 once more on my feet walking about like other persons, but up to the
 present never leaving my home even for a short journey. I think of you
 all in that busy capital and wonder if it is true that I too was once
 a part of it, and stood erect amid its jostling and excitement. Thank
 God He has given you strength to endure to the end!

 Lest I give a wrong impression, let me add that it was _physically
 only_ that I referred to my life as hard. Socially and pecuniarily it
 is and has been easy and beautiful. I have all the world for friends
 and no unsatisfied wants, no necessities, no regrets except that I
 am not strong enough to do the work around me which the world needs
 to have done. Until now it has not in five long years dared ask of
 me the smallest service. Lately the European people have laid upon
 my hands an international matter pertaining to humanity for which
 it seems proper that I see the President. If I should be able to go
 to Washington for this purpose after his return, would you think it
 probable I could see and speak with him?

 I hope, Mr. De Freize, my long letter has not been too great a burden
 to you. If so, let it console you that it is not without its uses,
 for it is a great relief to me to have said a little of that which I
 wanted to say so much, and I beg to remain with the highest esteem,

  Always gratefully your friend

  CLARA BARTON


  DANSVILLE, LIVINGSTON CO., N.Y.

  May 19, 1877

  MY DEAR GRAND DUCHESS:

 How shall I commence to write you after all these years of silence?
 Can it ever appear to you inexcusable? Will the generosity of your
 noble nature make you equal to the overlooking of an act which all
 the world, less noble and generous than yourself, would condemn
 as neglectful or forgetful? But, my preciously beloved friend, if
 these thoughts have ever taken hold upon your mind, and left their
 unpleasant shadow over the memory of your old-time friendship for me,
 and led you to feel that not only Republics, but their people as well,
 are _ungrateful_, and that you are only too happy in being relieved
 of such as you have known,--if all these dark thoughts and shadows
 lay there in your memory of me to-day, and I knew it, and knew also
 that they could only be removed by a full portrayal on my part of all
 the days and years of weakness, illness, suffering, and affliction
 which have caused the silence, I should hesitate long before I brought
 the picture to you; your active life and needed energies are not to
 be clogged and burdened by woes which do not belong to you, and the
 tax upon your sympathies is great enough from those who feel that
 they look rightfully to you for sympathy and help. Then let me say
 as little as possible of all this, and pass on to other things, and
 that little is, that during almost two years of the time since I last
 saw you in London, I have been not only too ill to write you, but
 too weak to have heard read a letter from you if it had been sent to
 me. You will understand from _theory_, and I pray the great and good
 God that you may _never_ know by _experience_, what helplessness and
 suffering may follow in the train of utter “prostration of the nervous
 system.” This was the misfortune that fell upon me directly upon my
 arrival in this country at the close of the year 1873, hastened and
 deepened by the death of my only sister whose life had been always
 dearer to me than my own. It was only last year, 1876, that I was able
 to leave my bed and learn to walk feebly about my room, sometimes see
 a friend, write a letter, and read my letters; then I was removed
 from my home in Massachusetts to this place, the largest and most
 noted water and rest cure in the country, where I have resided since,
 gradually regaining my strength, and coming back to life a little, but
 whether to _usefulness remains to be seen_. I have done everything to
 surround myself with healthful and strength-giving influences. The
 climate is delicious and I nearly live in the open air. Sleep, which
 in all years has been only a _visitor_, has come back to abide with
 me more constantly, and there is no night now in which it _quite_
 forsakes me. This was the great necessity, and I feel my strength
 returning under its blessed influence. My flesh is also returning
 and I am regaining some power of endurance. So far as any usefulness
 to others is concerned, I can see in all these years of helplessness
 only entire loss, but to myself I hope they may not have been without
 their uses and benefits. Through them I have walked narrower and
 darker paths than ever before, and stood very close to the dark still
 river. Aye, I have pitched my tents and rested there, waited calmly
 and sometimes, I fear, looked longingly over on to its other restful
 and brighter shore; but its shadows have not alarmed, its waters have
 not terrified. God has stood very near, my trust in Him has never
 faltered, and my faith has never wavered nor changed. I have known
 no fear, and if weakness, suffering, and inaction have made me more
 tender and thoughtful, it is well; if the silvery hair they have
 spread over temple and brow are a daily reminder that I have no longer
 the vigor of young strength, that, too, is well, and I will hope for
 added wisdom and gentler kindness.

 Now, my dear, this is all of me, but how is it with you and yours? For
 I have heard of you ill and suffering, and dared not ask more. I trust
 that is all past, and I should see only the bright, happy face that
 left its lovely picture on my memory. The noble husband, is he well?
 The beautiful “children”--I can scarcely picture them, for some of
 them are _men_ and _women_ now, and I never forget to pray God to keep
 and bless them all for the wife’s and mother’s sake. You will remember
 that the first great love in my heart for you carried me at one bound
 beyond all lines of courtly etiquette, blinded me to the positions and
 conditions of rank and royalty, and made me stupidly, awkwardly dumb
 to every titled phrase and courtly sentence; it closed and sealed my
 senses to all these, but opened them to the loving, tender wife and
 mother, the noble woman and the priceless friend. I could not have
 spoken a word of flattery to you sooner than I could have put it in my
 prayer; it could never have entered my thought to courtesy or bend the
 knee in your presence, but I should have lain in the dust at your feet
 without knowing it, if I had felt that it could serve you. A strange,
 uncourtly friend you have in me, this far-away American woman, my
 child, but a friend, nevertheless.

 And now comes up that dread theme that first brought me to know
 you--war, dreadful war. My heart has stood still for weeks in anxiety,
 fear, and dread. Is Germany, dear Germany, to be drawn into that
 terrible vortex? Are her mothers to give out their sons, and her wives
 their husbands again so soon? Are the graves to be opened again almost
 before they are green, and the wounds before they are healed? Are the
 fair fingers of her maidens again to ply the busy hours with bandages
 and lint and the trembling grandmothers to labor again with shirts
 and socks? And you and yours, who hold and guard the weal of all, are
 you to stand in jeopardy, and watch in agony again so soon? Are these
 dreadful days I so well remember all to be lived over again? I cannot
 yet believe it; neither can I yet rid me of the fear which haunts me
 day and night. Constantly the question rises, What _can I do_? And my
 weakness answers back, “Nothing, nothing.” If I had the strength of
 ten years ago, and the war opened upon you, I should prepare myself
 and go, not single-handed and alone, as I was overtaken in 1870, but
 I would make my arrangements with my people here for all material to
 work with, select my assistants from the German and German-speaking
 populations here, take my surgeons and nurses, and go at once and ask
 you for a field of labor. Surely you and your good husband and father
 and mother would assign me one somewhere! But it is all too late for
 this; at the best I can only use my influence and the little strength
 I have at home. As a means to this, I have written our good friend,
 Dr. Appia, of Geneva, to ask if any help from me would be desirable,
 and to say that if it would be acceptable, I would, upon his writing
 me to that effect, make the effort to establish an international
 organization in my own country for the collection and receipt of
 supplies, which should work under the insignia of the Red Cross, and
 forward through a headquarters which I would attempt to establish
 somewhere near or at New York. Thus would I try to bring the early
 and organized efforts of America into direct communication with the
 activities of Europe, and try for once to make our charities of some
 timely and real benefit, which the great distance and want of proper
 organization has hitherto greatly hindered, or nearly prevented. Our
 people are generous, tender of heart, and quick in their sympathies,
 but they are busy and spread over a quarter of the globe. They do
 not become aware of the necessities for assistance in other lands
 till great suffering exists and the general Press brings it to their
 knowledge. Then they spring with a bound of sympathy and generosity
 and give without stint, but their stream has no channel prepared for
 it to flow in and runs over and wastes, so that little, very little,
 ever reaches the real scene of suffering and want for which it is so
 generously given. If I can learn that it would be acceptable and that
 there can be established a direct coöperation between the charitable
 activities of America and Europe, and that Europe _desires it_, I
 shall do all in my power to organize the work early, at _once_ in
 America. It is for this I have written Dr. Appia to have him send
 me his _request_ that I would do it, that I may use it as a lever
 with our Government to gain its sanction, protection, prestige, and
 coöperation so far as I can. I shall watch with all interest every
 movement and I would be so grateful for any information that I might
 gain from European sources regarding the true condition of things. How
 glad I should be of any published work or matter, if any exists, which
 explains the working of _your_ remarkable system of, or what we term,
 “Relief Societies.” I do not know where to send for this but to _you_
 who were the originator and head. If the condition of Europe renders
 it desirable, and I am strong enough to organize aid in America,
 every word of information on these points would be held priceless.
 I am gleaning all I can from such foreign papers as I can get; both
 the German and French languages are familiarly used in my house. My
 amanuensis is Swiss and speaks both natively, of course. The more I
 read, the more I fear what the next months may bring to you, to dear
 Germany and to all Europe. And the more I fear, the more anxious I am
 to help. Let us pray God the storm may pass, but if it must come, give
 us strength and wisdom to meet it well.

 I have long been the debtor of good Madame de Mentzinger, and my next
 European letter will be to her, who I hope will forgive my delay. I
 was not able to answer her in time. To our dear Hannah I have not
 written in years, nor heard. I know the parent family is nearly gone,
 and that she has one of her own. I shall hope to hear of her some
 day,--the precious child!

 And dear Princess Wilhelm, who seems to me always to be a part of
 yourself, may I dare send my love through you to her? I remember once
 she graciously told me I might write her. I wonder if the privilege
 still exists, or has time annulled it? I know she has had her griefs
 and that her precious mother has gone home.

 All that happens to you there in that beloved Court circle is
 reflected and felt here in my distant home as if it were a part of
 it. I joy in your prosperity and sorrow for your griefs as if in some
 way they belonged to me or mine. I could not if I attempted to divest
 myself of this interest. I even could not help feeling a solicitous
 interest in all that pertained to Prince Alexis in his recent visit
 to my country, and rejoiced with a kind of motherly pride in all the
 good impressions he made, and felt that I ought to see him, because
 he was of your house, and the home cousin of dear Princess Wilhelm.
 He, the gallant, princely man, would have laughed at the idea of a
 plain, unpretending American woman cherishing a family pride in him
 and keeping a motherly watchfulness for his welfare, but your love and
 kindness to me when a stranger in your country won my gratitude and
 love forever for all that pertains to you. I have followed the late
 journeying and visits of your noble father with wonder and joy for
 his continued vigor. I so well remember the tender care and love that
 dwelt in my heart for my honored father when fourscore winters had
 whitened his locks and bared his brow, yet his firm marching step told
 not more than fifty summers, and his eye was still clear and his voice
 strong; but he left me, the brave old soldier.

 I always regret that I never saw your honored mother, and it was my
 purpose not to have left Europe without this distinguished pleasure.
 But her precious gift, the beautiful cross, is the chiefest among my
 treasures, lying always beside yours. You cannot conceive, I am sure,
 _how_ precious those gifts are to me, and do you recollect the sweet
 picture of yourself you once sent me for a Christmas gift? It has
 comforted me every day through all these suffering years, always near
 my bed. It was the first to greet me in the morning, and now, in these
 days of better strength and activity, it is no less the admiration of
 my friends than it has been the companion of my weakness.

 But I must somewhere make an end to this seemingly endless letter, and
 with one thought more I will.

 May I entreat you that, if disturbances and war come upon you, and
 there arises any contingency, any want, any point upon which it may
 seem that I could, being here, be of the smallest or largest use to
 you, or your people, you will not hesitate a moment in making any use
 of me that you possibly can; consult with me upon any plan (that it
 shall be strictly confidential I need not add) and it will be always
 possible for me to confer directly with the head or heads of our
 Government, and so far as I can I will influence our people to any
 charitable activities or movements which might be desired and which
 you kindly suggest to me. How glad I should be to feel myself once
 more working with you, that I was perhaps helping you a little, and
 the American people would be glad, for you are no stranger to them,
 and I want them to know you better still. I pray you let

  Your grateful and loving friend

  CLARA BARTON


What she found at Dansville that restored her health is shown in some
of her home letters. She found congenial society, wholesome and simple
food, and an atmosphere that believed health to be possible. The world
is moderately full of sick and half-sick people who could be well if
they knew how, and would believe that they were well.

She grew strong enough for short tours to neighboring cities. She
became a star performer in the evening entertainments in the
sanitarium, reciting poetry, sometimes writing a poem for a special
occasion, and after a time giving a short lecture about her experiences
abroad. A few of her letters will show her state of health and of mind.
There was nothing miraculous or sudden about her recovery. She had
periods of depression and times of weakness, but she gained strength
and gained it permanently, and was able to take up the greatest work of
her life and carry it through triumphantly.

  “OUR HOME ON THE HILLSIDE”
  DANSVILLE, LIVINGSTON CO., N.Y.
  July 15, 1876

  DEAR COZ:

 If Miss Kupfer had not written me that _she_ had written to you since
 our departure, I should have written earlier, but I knew she had told
 you of our safe arrival, and I thought I had then nothing of interest
 to say until I could tell you how I liked my surroundings. I have now
 been here seven weeks and find no occasion to regret coming. The place
 is simply beautiful in its location and surroundings, made up of hills
 and valleys under a high state of cultivation and taste.

 The institution is larger and more flourishing than I had expected,
 with about three hundred patients, or persons _as_ patients, and
 I think I never saw together any group of people that combines
 the degrees of intellect, general intelligence, and culture as
 is collected here. The speech of every person one meets is kind,
 charitable, and refined.

 The faculty connected with the institution is, I should judge,
 skillful and competent, but the general means for promoting health
 through proper food, water, bathing, dress, rest, sunshine, open
 air, and pleasant surroundings are mainly relied upon; little or no
 medicines are ever used. I have neither seen nor heard of any being
 used by any person since I have been here; indeed, the great struggle
 and effort seems to be to get _out_ of the patients the remnants of
 the medicines already taken in the past.

 We have several excellent lectures in the hall during the week and
 services on the Sabbath. The Hall is so situated that all can attend.
 No change or addition of dress required, more than to go from one room
 to another. If one is not able to walk, he is carried if he chooses to
 be, and if one does not wish to sit up, he lies down and listens, so
 there is no getting weary, no exhaustion, no getting over-tired. One
 gets all the good without the bad.

 The tables are _excellent_ and most abundantly supplied. Meats plainly
 but well cooked, the freshest of vegetables from their own gardens,
 and such abundance of fruit as I never saw, all in its turn. We have
 passed through the era of strawberries and cherries and currants,
 and are now in the raspberries, white, red, and black. I believe
 the blackberries follow next, and so on to the peaches, pears, and
 apples of autumn, but the astonishing thing after their freshness and
 perfection is their abundance. They are not served to us in saucers,
 or on individual plates, but placed in large fruit dishes once in
 about three feet through all the scores of tables, each one to help
 himself over and over, the dishes being refilled to the last, and we
 _leaving_ the tables filled as we _find_ them. The fruit is mainly
 picked from the gardens that day for dinner, or the evening before for
 breakfast, from two hundred to four hundred quarts for a meal. Besides
 this we have always the greatest abundance of “Shaker” dried fruits
 cooked for those who cannot take the fresh. New milk from their own
 dairy (they have forty or fifty cows), all one can use at every meal;
 the freshest of oatmeals and grahams, sweet butter, tapioca, etc. The
 vegetables are largely cooked in milk, and harmless. With all these
 fruits and vegetables there is no summer complaint here. I have not
 heard of a case, and among all these invalid people not a person in
 bed, except a few rheumatics who were brought here in beds and are not
 up yet. No fevers, no colics, but all out and about in the sunshine,
 and on the Hillside’s stretchers and hammocks under the trees. One has
 only to be lazy and jolly and get well if they can.

 There are a good many very pretty cottages outside the Main Institute
 where persons room, but all meet in the same dining-hall, and in
 the same parlor for prayers and singing after breakfast and the
 distribution of the mail after dinner. _I_ am in the Institute, or
 main building. The views from the verandas are as fine as many I
 have heard extolled in foreign countries. A single glance takes in a
 stretch of the valley of over ten miles in length, as handsome as a
 landscape garden. We are so high above the town that we seldom walk,
 but there are always livery teams waiting orders at the door. One
 drives or is driven as the choice may be. Dr. Jackson has a stable of
 about twelve horses for his and family uses and the work. They are
 handsome enough for a _fair_, and I occasionally find that they are
 good roadsters. The village below us is pretty and thriving.

 Miss Atwater lives in the village about a mile from me, but comes
 to lectures. She is well and seems very happy. I have ridden down
 to see her a few times. Her uncle is still with her. He had worked
 hard in his hotels for a great many years, been broken of his rest a
 great deal, and was considerably worn down, and seems to be glad of
 an opportunity to rest a little outside of a hot city. It makes it
 pleasant for Fanny till she gets more acquainted, but the people are
 very kind and social here. There is no stiffness.

 There are something like fifty people employed as _help_ to do the
 work of this Home, but not _one servant_; the word, nor position is
 not known here, all are treated equally, all ladylike and gentlemanly,
 all treated alike. There is an amusement society, and one of its
 features is a beautiful dance once a week from 5 till 8 P.M. Piano and
 violin music,--no round dances,--but cotillions and all dances which
 are _not injurious_, and the prettiest and most elegant dancers in the
 hall are from among the help.

 There is a regularly organized fire company on the grounds, and
 the houses are watched and patrolled all night like a first-class
 manufactory. No doors are ever locked; all stand open if not too cold.
 I have never turned a key in the house. Now, I believe I have told you
 all the most important features of the place I have come to, but I
 have been very careful not to overdraw it, for I _hope_ some of your
 journeys may sometime bring you to take a look at it for yourself, and
 I would not like you to be disappointed.

 I hope this severely hot weather has not been too much for you, and
 that sometime you will find time to drop a line to your

  Affectionate Coz

  CLARA

 I neglected to say that I find a good many old friends here. Our
 chaplain was a member of the Sanitary Commission in Washington, and
 the Reverend Dr. Abbott, who is here with his family, was President of
 the Christian Commission. Love to any who may inquire.

  CLINTON HOTEL, ROCHESTER
  Sunday [1876]

  DEAREST MAMIE:

 Does the date take you by surprise? Don’t be alarmed, it’s all right.
 I am only on a visit of a few days. Dr. Jackson, Miss Austin, and
 several other lady friends made a party and came last Friday to stay
 several days in Rochester, and enjoy the change and rest, and here
 we are having a glorious time. All but I can go to operas, church,
 lectures, galleries, etc., etc., and I can stay by and keep guard
 and direct the servants how to order the rooms, to have all ready
 and jolly for them when they get back. Mrs. Jones, principal of the
 Dansville Seminary, and a Miss Reynolds, who is “Thirza Ann” in a
 Betsey Bobbet Club we have here and a capital dramatist, are my room
 companions in the hotel. There is no lack of fun with two such fertile
 brains about. We go home next Tuesday.

 Now that I am through with myself, let me turn to you and say how glad
 I am that you have been to the Centennial and enjoyed it so well, made
 so much of it, and got home so well. What a beautiful gift that was
 from Mr. and Mrs. Shrubler, to you, that trip, a hundred-fold more
 than the beautiful dress which was a thing to be most grateful for,
 but it will wear out in time, while nothing short of eternity can take
 from you the knowledge and benefits of that exhibition. It is a thing
 for a lifetime, not only its pleasure but its profits. Please thank
 them both for me for this thoughtful courtesy to you and for the good
 dress also, and indeed for all their kindnesses to my little girl, who
 I know is grateful for herself, but I am also grateful for her.

 Now, you see I have not your letter here and cannot answer it as I
 ought, for I really do not recollect the questions it asks, neither
 do I recollect when I wrote you last, or what I told you then, so
 this letter is liable to be a repetition or an omission, but you will
 forgive this in either of the circumstances. I had a good letter from
 Ida just an hour before I started from Dansville and have answered it
 from there. She is a very easy, natural correspondent and would make
 a fine writer in some special directions if she could be cultivated.
 She sends me advertisement of your Papa D.’s farm. I was a little
 surprised at this, but it shows him in earnest in his assertion that
 he would like to be rid of it, and I do not wonder that he feels it
 a burden. It is more so than if it were larger and would afford more
 and efficient help, and pay for outlays. I consider it one of the most
 laborious sizes that a farm can have if one intends to use it as a
 farm, and if not, then it is too large. Four acres of nice buildings
 would really be worth more in the way of comfort, and these buildings
 have got to an age which will call for constant repairs, and the house
 is never convenient nor built for a farmhouse; in fact it was not
 intended for a farm by Grandpa, and there was no farm till your father
 made it so by his cultivation, for it was waste land.

 Did I tell you that the Taylors had sailed for England? They must be
 there now. How sweet and beautiful they were when here, and how in the
 two or three little days they spent here they made themselves felt
 and beloved. Mrs. Taylor is really one of the sweetest women I have
 ever known. Fannie is at the Centennial and I have just one line from
 her. She is almost frantic from the confusion. You know her head gets
 troubled easily, and she had not got it rested from the journey and
 the first days of the great show. She will remain long enough to find
 herself and look clearly and see what she “went for to see,” I trust.
 I am glad you have heard from Etta and glad they are getting on so
 well. Please give a great deal of love to dear Anna and congratulate
 her on her Centennial trip which, I trust, she enjoyed to its fullest,
 and thank Mr. Shrubler for his good gift to my dear old brother. I
 know it has made a warm spot in his heart for all the time he will
 live to wear it, and with his poor health and tendency to melancholy
 his joys are not too many. Mr. Shrubler has given him a great many
 pleasures, and I thank him most earnestly for them all.

 My kitty is charming. She knows almost as much as folks, and has just
 taken to mousing. She often carries in two and three and sometimes
 four and five bits of game a day, and all the family have to recognize
 each one before she will be at all quiet. She is too comical, standing
 at the door with her nice white face and her mouth full of mouse and
 grass, calling all the household out to see her.

  Yours lovingly

  CLARA


Miss Barton’s views on health, on politics, on society, on idle women,
and incidentally, perhaps, her best description of herself, her tastes
and habits, is contained in a letter of this period to a learned German
professor, who, knowing of her life in Germany, wrote to her, and
proposed to visit her. It is interesting to note that in this letter
she speaks of her hair as having been dark brown and changed in a few
months of illness to a silvery gray. It did not remain gray, but with
her return of health resumed its color of brown, though not so dark as
before:

  DANSVILLE, LIVINGSTON CO., N.Y.

  April 17, 1877

  ESTEEMED AND DEAR FRIEND:

 I beg you not to be alarmed even if you were correct in your
 conjecture that illness caused my silence. It is very true, but I am
 so far recovered now that, although not released from my bed, I have
 taken up my pen again, and yesterday, before receiving your card,
 had laid out your last letter as one of the first to be answered. I
 might, or I might not, have reached it to-day in regular order, but
 now, I place it first, and commence my morning roll-call with “Prof.
 Thed. Pfau,” and a long, narrow, blue-tinted envelope responds, half
 wearily, half impatiently, “_Here_.” So “here” we have it.

 First, having _admitted_ illness, which I never do if possible to
 avoid, I must settle your apprehensiveness; it is no new play, or act
 or scene, simply a calling before the curtain for repetition. I have
 in these exhausted days only a given amount of strength, and if, by
 any accident or oversight, I overdraw on my accounts, I am at once
 bankrupt, and can carry on business no further. Having been in former
 days accustomed to draw from an unlimited and ever-recruiting stock of
 strength and health, I find it a difficult problem to solve, how to
 bring myself down to the necessary economies of my present condition.
 I cannot realize that a few hours, a few rods, a few steps even, a
 little overwork at my desk, the quiet arranging of a simple room, a
 little overrun of company, may use up all my little capital, and I
 must wait and compromise with my creditors, start business anew on a
 smaller scale, and work my way up again to the lost point, probably
 only to lose it again. A month or six weeks ago I committed some
 one of these extravagances, and immediately comes a notice from my
 physical banker shutting off my supply of sleep. He had been allowing
 me nearly seven hours in the four and twenty, but he cut it down
 to three, two, one, a few minutes, none at all, and so left me for
 several days and nights, then let it come back in a similar ratio up
 to--Oh, well, no matter how much, but not _seven hours_, no, nor for
 a long time to come; but I can get up and walk about my room and sit
 part of the day; and I write, because it is better for me to write
 chatty letters, with no thought in them, than to relapse into solid
 thinking as I would in doing nothing. One sometimes needs to be saved
 from himself.

 I do not know if I have ever told you of my illness, or what holds
 me so weak. It is what is known as “prostration of the nervous
 system,” and very complete at that, I suppose. I am not aware of
 any decided organic disease, only as all the organs are affected by
 this great letting down of nerve power and force. Of the class of
 disease generally denominated “female weaknesses” I know nothing
 experimentally. Of the lame backs and aching _lower_ spine, that the
 majority of feeble women suffer torture from, I am ignorant, and
 can sympathize with them only through observation, but of the _hot_
 sore spot on the spine, high up between the shoulders, leading up to
 the base of the brain, bursting into flame at every over-taxation
 of mental energy, I know all. It is the same thing that over-worked
 public men sink under, in sudden deaths, softening of the brain,
 paralysis, or something analogous to these. This is the illness that
 has become my master and will one day prove my conqueror. There is
 no looking forward to “restored health,” soundness and _security_.
 The price of not only my liberty, but my life is “eternal vigilance.”
 Now a truce to illness, to which, thank God, you are a comparative
 stranger, and I pray Him you always may be.

 I have received “Puck” since his advent into this warring world, and
 he is growing to be a fine little fellow, stout and healthy, a jolly
 little elf, isn’t he? His _wit_ will get him some clips over the nose
 by and by, when it begins to be felt, but this he does not care for,
 for he _means_ to bite. I laughed heartily at his satire on Stanley
 two weeks ago, and yet Stanley is a valued friend, and I have fought
 terrible battles for him on both continents, but the imitation is
 excellent and full of ingenuity. The cuts are, of course, inimitable.
 Mr. Kepler’s pencil has a master touch, and I wish him long life,
 abundant success, full pockets, and artistic fame.

 The spring is opening well here. We have had a succession of charming
 days, followed now by a rain which is bringing up the green grass
 and swelling the buds almost to bursting, but we have no leaves yet.
 Some wild trees which precede their leaf life by their flowers are
 out in spring dress; a kind of woods willow, which bedecks itself in
 deep yellow, is very gaudy just now; the peach trees are pushing out
 their little soft gray pussy toes all over their red branches, and the
 horse-chestnuts, with their blunt ends tipped with swollen round buds,
 look as if they had doubled up their fists for fighting and said to
 all their more tapering, slender neighbors, Come on, we are ready! We
 are yet a month too early for the first roses.

 Perhaps I told you that I removed to a snug brick city-built house
 for the winter. I have changed it this spring for a much older and
 country-like wood house, which has some trees, grass, and shade, a
 garden, and _perhaps_ some flowers if the sunshine brings them up.
 I am, of course, all too unpretending and simple in my life to have
 a gardener, so shall lack the beauties which such assistance would
 develop. I was once a very tolerable gardener myself among flowers,
 but I have no longer strength to spend on the strong lap of Mother
 Earth, much as I love her and her dear little nurslings of cowslip and
 violets, but good sturdy old dame, she does a great deal without help,
 and knows very well how to dress herself without the aid of a _fille
 de chambre_.

 But here I am on this fourth large page, and not even yet noted the
 contents of your letter. The photograph! I am sorry that you withheld
 it, I should have been very glad to receive it, if you would entrust
 it to me, and I still hope you will decide to do so. I should prize
 it, but I cannot say when I should be able to return the favor. I
 have no photographs either good or bad. I am never able to go to a
 gallery to sit for one. The last time was in Paris. All I ever had
 have been picked away long ago. I am the debtor of all my friends for
 pictures, some of them several times over, but they know how it is,
 and I hope excuse me. If I should ever again be in condition to sit,
 and can get a result that my friends will accept, I will take them
 by the hundred and relieve myself from embarrassment, but you should
 know that as a _picture_ my photograph is not at all to be coveted. If
 natural, it must be uncomely. I was _never_ what the world calls even
 “good-looking,” leaving out of the case all such terms as “handsome,”
 and “pretty.” My features were strong and square, cheek-bones
 high, mouth large, complexion dark; my best feature was perhaps a
 luxuriant growth of glossy dark hair shading to blackness, but that
 is comparatively thin now, and silver gray, all within the last three
 years. It changed from its original blackness to its present shade in
 the first six weeks of this present illness in 1874. I never cared
 for dress, and have no accomplishments, so you will find me plain and
 prosy both in representation and reality if ever you should chance to
 meet either. I beg you to _believe_ this and to _remember_ it to avoid
 any disappointment which might possibly occur. Not that I think it
 could change the friendship of a sensible person, but I like people,
 and especially my friends, to know me as I am, and not hold a false
 estimate of me.

 Of poor Miss R. (Lorraine Raymond) I never hear a word. It is
 charitable to attribute her silence to want of scholarship, but I am
 inclined to disbelieve the verity of this. I believe her to be a very
 fair scholar, and an average (to say the least of it) correspondent;
 but she seldom writes, I know. She wrote me a few letters from Europe
 _years_ ago, none of late years. She has a kind heart, and I am so
 _so_ sorry for her.

 I hope the trial of your brother will not result disastrously to him.
 Perhaps one cannot easily control a dislike, but he has certainly
 chosen a most powerful foe, and the odds _seem_ unequal. I agree with
 you in more than word, when you declare the Imperial Family of Germany
 to be a _respectable one_; it is all of that, nothing in Europe stands
 before it, and those of it whom I have known personally are of the
 highest excellence and purest worth. I am sure the more intimately
 they are known, the better they must be beloved. The Grand Duchess
 of Baden is to _me_ the loveliest woman on the earth; in this term I
 mean to combine all qualities of both mind and body; both nature and
 culture have made her a _Princess_. And I cannot see why she is not
 as good a Republican as if she had been born a peasant, or a Suisse,
 or American citizen; in no position would she knowingly do a wrong or
 commit an act of tyranny to the lowest human being whether subject
 or not. “Tired of Republics,” you say. Perhaps if you study your own
 meaning closely you will find that you are rather tired of politics
 than Republics. And, my esteemed and valued friend, let me in all
 childlike simplicity suggest what does not perhaps clearly appear to
 you, viz., that the standpoint one occupies, the surroundings one
 has, the outlook one takes, have a great deal to do in forming the
 opinion and swaying the judgment. I am sorry that you must perforce
 see our country, its political, moral, and social sides, through the
 slum, and mire, and haze of a lens like New York City. Out on our
 millions of acres of hills, valleys, and plains is a better, purer,
 nobler population, the force of whose earnestness and honesty will
 save our Nation long ages after the pollution of its cities would
 have turned it into a Sodom and Gomorrah. There is a true, steady,
 honest pulse beating in the veins of the yeomanry of this land that
 never throbbed a second in a city like New York, and never will; but
 when the trial comes, _it is the pulse that will tell_. Tweed and his
 “ring” didn’t go to the farmers sweating in their hay-fields with
 their _bargains_. They went to the politicians, and burrowed in the
 cities and made their nests like the bats and owls, under the eaves of
 churches and in halls and steeples; they can plan, and connive, and
 twiddle and fiddle with the lines a long time while the farmers work
 in their fields, but when real danger appears, when the load topples
 and is likely to upset, stouter hearts than theirs will come to the
 front, stronger hands than theirs will take the reins, and bring out
 the load in safety. We are not so near destruction as it would seem
 from _your_ standpoint, and because a few poor, vain, foolish women,
 with little money and less brains and shriveled hearts, have betaken
 themselves to the boarding-houses of New York City, and are living
 false, empty, silly, idle lives for _show_, it does not make it that
 this is the character or life of _all_ the women of America, nor that
 well-regulated _homelife_ is not the rule of the country, _for it is_;
 and I, who am a part of it, and have lived it, and over and among it,
 all my lifetime, know it _well_. Shall we judge France and its whole
 people by the courtesans of Paris, or Germany by Berlin? Oh! my friend
 and brother, do, I beseech of you, get another standpoint, and a wider
 outlook and a clearer, purer atmosphere than New York City with its
 floodtide of immigration before you judge, in final judgment, the
 whole population, male and female, of this great country.

 I thank you very much for the hope expressed that we may meet in
 Paris in ’78, but there is small prospect of this. I shall scarcely
 cross the ocean again. I have much to do to save my strength with no
 unnecessary waste, but the hope expressed that we may meet before
 that time is something nearer home, and more within the range of
 _possibilities_. I should never dare by any means to invite you to
 visit me, and I never go to your part of the country, so the prospect
 of our meeting is small. Perhaps I ought to explain the above remark,
 having very incautiously made it, and I will. I am a so much more
 simple person in my mode of life than you have probably ever seen
 (except those whom poverty compelled to simplicity) that you would
 not feel happy or homelike in my house. I am simple in my tastes,
 and plain, avoiding luxuries from choice and _principle_, both
 about my house and in its dress, and my table and its furnishings.
 My living is simple as a hermit’s, heavy meats, and wines, teas,
 and coffees are unknown at my table, my rooms plain. I have only my
 housekeeper--no retinue of servants at all, no show, no ornaments, no
 excuses; but with all this there is great peace and quiet, no worry,
 no fret, no fears of what the world will think or say, no pressure in
 any direction, abundant supplies for all _necessities_, no scandal
 either spoken or listened to, no backbiting, and no “skeleton in the
 closet,” not even the _shadow_ of one. Now, all this simplicity and
 plainness, and the absence of excitement and luxurious surroundings
 and living, must be so different from all that you are accustomed to
 that you could not be happy or even comfortable among it, so I should
 never _dare_ invite you to visit me, even if you were journeying near
 me, and so, when you see that I do not, you will understand the true
 reason and assign the right motive on my part and not feel piqued or
 slighted, or that I am cold, or eccentric, or reserved, or in any way
 unaccountable, or any other thing, but just _what I am_, a plain
 woman with enough of common sense to perceive that our modes of life
 are so different that you could not enjoy visiting me, and fearless
 candor enough to tell you so.

  Your sincere friend

  CLARA BARTON


How Clara Barton was regarded at Dansville is shown in many ways, as in
the following cutting from the Dansville “Advertiser” of June 7, 1877,
giving account of an exercise on the previous Memorial Day:

 OVATION TO MISS CLARA BARTON

 Toward noon on Memorial Day the bustle of preparation to go downtown
 to the procession and oration seemed to arouse a new impulse of
 gratitude to the soldiers’ friend, Miss Clara Barton, which spread
 rapidly through Our Home, and soon organized itself in a programme of
 proceedings for the evening, when she should have rested a little from
 the fatigue of her participation in the public celebration.

 By six o’clock a goodly number of men and women and children had
 gathered in Brightside and on the surrounding lawn. Soon this company,
 consisting of doctors and other officials, the stronger patients and
 helpers from the Cure, a few near-by neighbors, and the inmates of
 Brightside, were marshaled two by two on the walk before the gate.
 Of the hundred nosegays which the girls had hastily tied up and
 heaped on a server, none were left when each person had taken one;
 and these, with numerous “flags a-floating,” made the procession gay
 as it moved on, led by the clergy. The Conesus brass band, taking
 tea at the seminary, had patriotically agreed to add to the dignity
 of the enterprise by their numbers and their music. Meanwhile one of
 the company had casually (apparently) in a neighborly way dropped
 into Miss Barton’s parlor, and lured her on to the front piazza in
 time to witness the approach as the allies joined their forces. Being
 entirely taken by surprise, she could only exclaim to her attendant,
 “What does it all mean? What shall I do?” when she saw the battalion
 bearing down--rather up--on her castle. Evidently she was completely
 subjugated without a gun being fired, and looked helplessly and
 speechlessly around on the lines of exultant faces which, filing
 right and left, had environed the piazza in a semicircle. It still
 required some gentle force, however, to seat her on the chair in
 readiness for her. At this juncture Miss Austin, stepping forward,
 said:

 MISS BARTON: After joining our sympathies with our fellow citizens at
 large in paying a tribute of respect and gratitude to the brave men
 who fought and suffered and died for their country’s salvation, the
 inmates of Our Home come with gladness to greet a _living woman_--one
 who worked and suffered and gave her strength and health in
 alleviating the pains and sorrows, the homesickness and heart-sickness
 of our soldiers. And we are thankful that your mission was not alone
 to _our_ soldiers, but that you represented a vastly broader and
 nobler sentiment than mere patriotism--that you were actuated by that
 grand humanity which forbade you even in war-times to know any North
 or any South; but that every man to whom you could in any way minister
 was your brother. We rejoice in this, because you then represented the
 selfsame spirit which must yet bridge over the chasm that has hitherto
 divided the two sections and make us one united brotherhood--a happy
 and prosperous country.

 But, dear Miss Barton, your life and labors have carried you beyond
 _our country_, and through you we hold fraternal bonds to the whole
 world. In foreign countries and in a foreign war, you spent your
 sympathies and your efforts, not on the Germans, nor on the French,
 nor on any nationality; but everywhere, every man, every woman, every
 little child who needed help or loving succor, received these from you
 in the full measure of your capacity to bestow.

 We come, then, to lay our honors at your feet as a citizen of the
 world, as a friend to humanity, as a lover of your race; recognizing
 the work which you have done as a foreshadowing of that time when
 men shall beat their swords into ploughshares and their spears into
 pruning hooks, when nations shall not lift up sword against nations,
 neither shall they learn war any more.

Miss Austin then introduced Reverend Miss Anna Oliver, of Passaic, New
Jersey, who said:

 The feeling of enthusiastic admiration with which I have long regarded
 one whose course has reflected honor upon her country, upon womanhood
 and humanity, prevent me from making a set speech on this occasion.

 Several years ago I had the pleasure, Miss Barton,--I may say the sad
 pleasure,--of visiting Andersonville Prison, and the cemetery laid
 out under your supervision, placing a flower on each of those several
 thousand graves. During that visit through the South, I frequently
 heard the name of Miss Barton mentioned with gratitude and love, both
 by those who had served in the Confederate and in the Union armies.

 War is terrible, and we all know, of course, that no such thing as
 a necessary war ever occurred. But as long as wars are actualities,
 how blessed is the thought that the barbarities of past ages may be
 superseded by the gentle Christian ministrations, a representative of
 which we delight to honor to-day.

  We mourn the fratricidal strife
    That digs each soldier’s grave;
  We strew the flowers on the sod
    In honor of the brave;
  But most of all we rev’rence those
    Who seek man’s life to save.

  They marched on the advancing foe
    They nobly fought and fell;
  But there were those attending near,
    ’Mid shower of shot and shell,
  As brave in a diviner cause,
    Who did their part as well.

 To-day we pay our tribute of respect to the names of Florence
 Nightingale and Clara Barton.

Dr. Jackson then, being called by Miss Barton to her aid, thanked her
friends in her behalf and happily expressed what he imagined might be
her feelings on the occasion. When he had finished, the “Star-Spangled
Banner” was sung by the choir.

Miss Barton now spoke briefly and feelingly of the honor done her and
the happy memory to be cherished. Sometime she might express herself
better. The most she could do now was simply to offer these friends a
hand-grasp.

Then each person laid down his offering of flowers till her lap was
piled high and her feet were buried deep in a pink-and-white mound,
each as he passed claiming the promised hand-shake. While this was
going on, the band played an inspiring air and the people of the
hillside retired with the pleasant consciousness of having enjoyed a
happy half-hour.

Afterward Miss Barton had a personal introduction to each member of the
band, who had so kindly assisted in paying honor to one enjoying the
reverence and affection of the American people, as of all classes, from
the lowest peasantry to the crowned heads in Europe.




CHAPTER VI

THE FORERUNNERS OF THE RED CROSS


When Clara Barton began her ministry in the Civil War, she had
practically no knowledge concerning work that had been done in America
or elsewhere for the relief of wounded soldiers. She did not remember
even to have heard of Florence Nightingale until she was actually
engaged in work of a similar character. When, at Port Royal, she was
serenaded and hailed as “the Florence Nightingale of America,” she
knew what it meant, but she had not known very long. She took up the
duty just as Dorothea Dix and other brave women did, in an earnest
effort to do the thing that needed to be done, and she learned how to
do it by doing it. She discovered the defects in other systems then
employed, but did not criticize them. She realized the difficulties
under which volunteer workers were working, and she carefully refrained
from passing any unkind judgments upon organizations that were laboring
under almost insuperable difficulties. But she found her own method of
work, and she performed it with a success which, without robbing any
other brave woman of any portion of her due fame, wrought for Clara
Barton a crown of unfading laurel.

Not until she found herself in Switzerland, and was asked by Swiss
representatives of the Red Cross why America had refused to join in
that movement, had she found occasion to study the history of movements
for the relief of wounded on the battle-field.

The sick and wounded in the wars of the Crusades were cared for,
inadequately but nobly, by the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of
Jerusalem, of Rhodes and of Malta. These Christian knights ministered
alike to Christian and Saracen. In some of the subsequent wars of
Europe the Sisters of Charity of the Roman Catholic Church rendered
such service as they were able.

And yet the history of the care of the wounded in all the wars, from
the dawn of history, is one of cruel and, in many respects, of needless
suffering.

During the Crimean War Florence Nightingale with thirty-eight nurses
went from England to Scutari, across the Bosphorus from Constantinople,
and rendered service which made her name a household word the world
around. It was Clara Barton’s lifelong regret that she did not meet
Florence Nightingale during her long stay in England, but she was sick
and so was Miss Nightingale, and neither thought of the other as being
within call.

The real beginning of the movement which resulted in the organization
of the Red Cross began with Henri Dunant, who was born at Geneva in
1828. When he was thirty-one years of age, in 1859, the forces of
Sardinia and of Victor Emmanuel, with the allied army of France under
Napoleon III, waged war against Austria for the freedom of northern
Italy. At the battle of Solferino, forty thousand soldiers were killed
or wounded. The defeated Austrians retreated, and the French and
Italians pursued, leaving the wounded almost deserted. Surgeons at that
time were not protected from attack, and the surgeons of each army
moved on with the army. Dunant gathered women of the neighborhood and
gave what relief he could without distinction of nationality.

On his return to Geneva, filled with tragic memories of the scenes of
horror he had witnessed, he issued a pamphlet entitled “Souvenir de
Solferino.” In this he described the scenes which he had witnessed,
and propounded this question: “Would it not be possible to found and
organize in all civilized countries volunteers which in time of war
would render succor to the wounded without distinction of nationality?”

Geneva had an organization for philanthropic and humane work, known as
the “Society of Public Utility.” Its president was Monsieur Gustave
Moynier. He was deeply moved by Dunant’s pamphlet, and sent out an
invitation for a conference to organize “An International Conference
for Investigating Means to Supplement the Inadequacy of Medical
Services of Armies in Campaigns.”

This led to the conference of August, 1864, to which reference has
already been made, in which the United States was unofficially
represented by Mr. George C. Fogg, American Minister to Switzerland,
and Mr. Charles S. P. Bowles, European Agent of the Sanitary Commission.

All this Clara Barton learned as she studied the history which lay
behind a movement in which she was to have so important a share. Of
movements in the United States she already knew.

The United States Sanitary Commission was organized in New York City on
May 18, 1861, with the Reverend Henry W. Bellows, D.D., as president.
The good which it did in the Civil War was incalculable. In cooperation
with it was the Western Sanitary Commission, organized in St. Louis on
September 5, 1861.

The Young Men’s Christian Associations of the country led in the
organization of the United States Christian Commission, which was
formed in New York, November 16, 1861. Besides these were innumerable
societies which were formed by women for the furnishing of supplies,
the establishment of rest homes, and the distribution of comforts to
soldiers.

When, in 1864, the United States was asked to participate in the work
of the Red Cross, there was very little inclination on the part of
Government officials, to treat this request with any more courtesy
than official etiquette required. The Government did not feel very
kindly toward European Governments for their attitude during the war of
our rebellion. We had established our own agencies for the relief of
suffering, and had no inclination to add another.

When the war was over, however, Dr. Bellows was confident America would
join in the International Red Cross. He issued a long letter addressed
to Monsieur Henri Dunant, who was acting as “Secrétaire du Comité
International de Secours aux Militairet Blessés.” This Dr. Bellows did
as President of “The American Association for the Relief of Misery of
Battle-fields.” On its title-page was emblazoned a Red Cross as the
insignia of the organization, the first time that symbol was used in
America, and, until Clara Barton’s day, the last.

In this long and earnest and discriminating letter, intended to arouse
public sentiment in America, Dr. Bellows told, with great plainness of
speech, of the inadequacy of even those splendid organizations with
which he himself had been associated. He said:

 Good intentions and humane sentiments are not alone qualifications for
 this duty.... Volunteer agents are the dearest that can be used.... It
 is useless to expect correct information on the wants of the soldier
 from the Government, or the Medical Bureau, or even the General
 Officers. The last thing to which a Government attends in an active
 war is the sick and wounded. The Medical is the least interesting
 bureau to it, and as a rule army surgeons have hard and coarse views
 of humanity to soldiers. General officers seldom see with their own
 eyes the details of want and suffering.

He paid a high tribute to the work of the women in the war. He said
that virtually the whole womanhood of the Nation was engaged in it. He
spoke of the women in hospitals, and said that some of them had done
well, but that “detailed men are the appropriate nurses in military
hospitals. Women are rarely in place at the front, or even at the base
of armies.” He said that, of the women who went to the front, “most
of them were in the way, with a few rare exceptions, where tact and
humanity were united with force and endurance.” His letters to Clara
Barton leave no doubt as to one whom he considered in the forefront of
these exceptions, combining, as she did, tact and humanity with force
and endurance.

Dr. Bellows’s effort fell completely flat so far as the organization of
the society was concerned. He became thoroughly discouraged and gave it
up, and years afterward rejoiced when he saw Clara Barton accomplish
what he had vainly striven to do.

This was the situation as Clara Barton learned it, when returning
health brought back to her the strong purpose of proceeding at once to
the organization of an American Red Cross.




CHAPTER VII

THE YEARS OF LONELY STRUGGLE


For several years after the Franco-Prussian War, Europe was at peace.
But trouble was brewing between Russia and Turkey, and no one knew
what the end of it would be. The probability that there would be war
in Europe appeared to Clara Barton to indicate a possibly favorable
condition of public sentiment in America for the consideration of the
Red Cross. If there was to be war in Europe, and we were to be asked
to help in the relief of the suffering it would cause, it would seem
fitting that there should be some international organization by which
relief could be gathered on this side and distributed upon the other.
The American public would then see some reason why America should be
interested in an organization of this character.

Clara Barton communicated with Dr. Louis Appia, who had called upon
her in Switzerland, and with whom she had been associated in the
Franco-Prussian War, offering to assist, in such way as she might be
able, in effecting a suitable organization.

From Dr. Appia and from President Gustave Moynier, she received prompt
letters, and, with these, official appointment to represent in America
the International Committee of the Red Cross. This correspondence is
lengthy, but of the greatest possible value and must be included in
full:

  DANSVILLE, May 17, 1877

  DR. LOUIS APPIA

  Member Société Internationale of the Red Cross
  of Geneva

  MY ESTEEMED AND DEAR FRIEND:

 If years have passed since any word from my pen told you of my
 existence, and if the precious letter from you has lain many months
 unanswered, it has not been the fault of my memory, nor the loss of
 friendship, nor interest in you nor in the glorious and holy work
 which engrosses and fills your noble life. It has been simply that,
 ill, weak, worn, and suffering, I have been lost to the work of the
 world, and to the friends I honored and loved. Four long years have
 found and held me powerless to strike a blow on the great anvil of
 humanity, or labor one day in its vineyards, and for the most part
 too weak even to hear of those who did. But the strong brothers and
 sisters have toiled bravely on while I waited. The great wheels have
 slowly turned, until they have ceased to crush me so low, and grind
 me so small, and once more I begin, under God’s Providence, to reach
 out my hands into the passing atmosphere of life and feel the breezes
 blow over the seared and fevered palms. Once more I dare turn my eyes
 toward the labor-fields and their faithful workers; in my land, bright
 with its western sunbeams, aglow with beauty and abounding in plenty,
 they sew and glean in peaceful valleys.

 But beyond the eastern waves, in that dear old land that four years
 of life there taught me to love so well, I see again the flash of
 the bayonet, the march of armies trampling down the harvests; the
 terror-stricken fly for rescue, and the wounded cry for help. Again
 the Red Cross, like the bow of promise, rises over the scene, again
 the shout from its inspired origination rings out amid the din of
 arms, and its clear, brave tones reach me even here in my quiet
 chambers, and my heart, with all its old memories stirred to their
 depths, goes out in response; it bids me seize my pen and say to you
 that what there is of me is still ready for my work; that like the
 old war horse that has rested long in quiet pastures, I recognize the
 bugle-note that calls me to my place, and, though I may not do what I
 once could, I am come to offer what I may. Then, would I have taken
 the next steamer, and in two weeks have stood beside you, asking where
 to go, and what to do, but as that is not for me now, my brain and
 heart must do what my hands cannot. My plans are made, and, such as
 they are, I send them to you for acceptance and coöperation.

 First, I cannot quite rid myself of the lingering hope that the
 terrible vision of war before you will vanish before its full
 realization, but if not and the nations are drawn into its vortex,
 God only knows the end. I cannot foresee it, but I can foresee that
 my country will open its heart and its hand in aid as soon as the
 cry of want and suffering shall reach it; this never fails. The
 American nature is free and impulsive, its sympathies are quick and
 responsive, and it has neither power nor desire to withhold aught
 from the distressed. But, ready as America will be, she is far away
 from the scene, can understand but vaguely the steps necessary to
 the proper gathering, sending, and bestowal of her gifts. So without
 some definite and well-arranged organization, however large and
 generous her donations, she will fail of accomplishing any real or
 perceptible good, as she has always failed before in all similar
 efforts, at foreign aids. Foreseeing this, I would, if possible, step
 in to fill this place, and hold back this waste of waters till they
 can be turned into their proper channels. And for this, my honored
 friend and brother, I write to you, to ask if I can be of service in
 this direction. If so, I will do my best to form such an organization
 in America, if you and your Committee desire it. As it is now, in
 spite of all efforts which you have so generously made to spread the
 knowledge of your society and its great objects in this country, it
 is almost unknown, and the Red Cross, in America, is a Mystery. I am
 safe in asserting that not one person in a hundred on this side of
 the Atlantic ever heard of it; not one in five hundred has any clear
 idea of its uses or design. The Franco-German War failed entirely
 in introducing it either to the people or the Government, and so
 will this present war, unless some active hand takes hold of it,
 to organize the war reliefs under its escutcheon. It is not enough
 that some good person stands inactively as the _representative_ of
 the society in this broad country. To be learned it must be brought
 into active use. It must have a National Headquarters, sanctioned
 by the Government, where the flag of the beautiful Red Cross floats
 day and night, in war and in peace. It must have its different State
 organizations, and its smaller relief societies all working under its
 insignia. This accomplished, the charities gathered from the people
 should be passed to the State and thence to the National Headquarters,
 and, these being always in communication with you, they would be
 shipped intelligently and reach at once a field in need of them.
 My heart aches when I think of all the thousands upon thousands of
 dollars in goods and grains sent to France in the best of faith by our
 people in 1871 and wasted; lost, squandered, and sold on its borders,
 it being impossible to gain transportation or penetrate the army
 lines; and all for the want of the proper knowledge and organization
 at home. It will be the same thing again unless some method is taken
 to centralize, organize, and prevent.

 I have only a word more to add, and I feel called to make the
 suggestion I make by the fact that I am perhaps almost the only
 American who you can feel has been a co-worker with you, whose manner
 of work you _know_ something of, and whom you can class as a personal
 friend and thus address familiarly. And my suggestion is, that if you
 feel that I can serve your cause, and humanity through it, in the
 manner I have described, you will let me know your desires _at once_.
 If you will write me immediately upon receipt of this, asking in your
 own name or that of the International Society, that I do all in my
 power to aid you in the work, and to use my power with my people and
 my Government, so that it can be seen here that such a want is felt,
 such a work needed, and that the call is from the highest and original
 source of international relief in war, investing it with the highest
 importance, I will have your letter placed before our President and
 Government and ask their sanction and approval, if not the pecuniary
 aid; for that I never ask. And if it is inclined to be so gracious, it
 may perhaps appoint a Head to the work, thus, by its notice, investing
 it with an importance, and throwing about it a protection, which
 it could in no other wise secure. This would forever establish the
 knowledge and the work of the Red Cross for which its noble founders
 have striven so bravely and faithfully in every mile of American soil.
 The soldier would learn to trust it, the father would honor and bless
 it, the mother would bind it over her torn and aching heart as she
 kissed her soldier boy good-bye, and the little children even in the
 wilds would come to know and love its beautiful face.

 Now, my honored friend, this is not an appeal that you make _me_ the
 head of your noble order in this country, the active working head
 I mean, for I have little ambition at best and none now, but it is
 to tell you that such a head must be made before the order here can
 ever come to be of the smallest possible use to the world. Thus far
 it has failed, and I see no way to establish it but by a call coming
 earnestly from you and being actively and unselfishly and powerfully
 and wisely placed before the moving powers of this Nation and the
 people. If you have already some person in your mind who will do this,
 or who you prefer should attempt it, then it is all well, only see
 that he does his duty and is not asleep at his post. There is no more
 time for this. But if you have not such a person in mind, and feel
 that I can serve you acceptably, you have but to let me know and I
 will do all in my power. Please write me at once. The stronger your
 appeal to me, the better use I can make of it, and meanwhile I shall
 not be idle or inactive, but will hope to hear from you within the
 next six weeks, say by the 1st of July.

 Please accept my most grateful thanks for the kind sympathies
 expressed in your letters of last year which I was too ill to answer,
 and remember me in great respect to your family and the mutual friends
 in my home in Geneva.

 Perhaps to you, as a physician, it would be proper to state that my
 long illness has been, as you most likely would suspect, “prostration
 of the nervous system,” and you know how slowly one rallies from this,
 and with what difficulty the strength is regained. I am now at my
 best by far since 1873; am about my house and grounds, ride, walk,
 meet friends, and sleep tolerably well, not as in the old days on the
 ground without bed or pillow, but comfortably, and am always gaining a
 little in strength.

 I trust this may find you well, and it will carry to you the best
 wishes and most sincere esteem of

  Your friend

  CLARA BARTON


  [_Translation_]

  PARIS, June 14, 1877

  MISS BARTON, AND HONORED FRIEND:

 It is in French that I write to you, for you would laugh at my bad
 English. I am at present in Paris on a visit at my brother’s. I hear
 that Mr. Moynier has written to you on the same subject which will
 make the contents of this letter. I expect Mr. Moynier in Paris in a
 few days, which will give me the opportunity to talk the proposition
 over with him, which we both wish you to take an interest in.

 Mr. Moynier has undoubtedly told you that our Committee has tried
 for these last ten years to give to an American Committee an active
 existence, but we failed. In the first years our communications were
 made through a Mr. Bowles, then residing at Paris, with whom we ceased
 to correspond, not seeing that we arrived to any certain result by
 this channel. Later we have been in direct communication with Dr.
 Henry W. Bellows, President of a phantom Committee in New York, from
 whom we seldom receive an answer. Having therefore no proof that that
 committee was active, we ceased to correspond, and we at last learned
 officially that that committee was officially and entirely dead. From
 that time, about a year since, we considered the Red Cross as not
 existing any more in America. I need not speak here of the disease
 which has caused that death. You are an American and you know better
 than we the temperament of your Nation. Our hope to entertain the life
 has been nourished in us by the reading of the admirable work which
 America had made for the care of the wounded during the Secession
 War. We spoke of it at length in the thick volume which Mr. Moynier
 and myself have published under the title, “The War and Charity,” and
 which obtained the integral prize of the central committee in Berlin.
 Mr. Moynier has told you, without doubt, how happy we should be to
 see a work come into life again in your rich and generous America,
 which had shone with such a bright luster at the epoch when it was
 stimulated by the mighty auxiliary of the patriotic motive. We know
 little what America has done for the victims of the Franco-German War,
 which you have seen and during which we have for some time worked
 together, and I am not surprised that many generous gifts have been
 lost for want of a good organization, and especially for want of
 being able to establish regular communications with the armies by the
 channel of an American auxiliary committee residing in Europe and
 which would offer all the security.

 If you, my honored friend, could succeed in organizing something
 durable in America, in relation to the Oriental War which appears
 only in its beginning, you would have nobly crowned the work of
 devotedness to which you have consecrated your life. I do not know
 what means of execution Mr. Moynier proposed. I shall write again
 upon that subject, when I shall have seen him, so that we agree
 completely together in what we tell you. Permit me, however, now to
 communicate to you some ideas. You can without doubt become the soul
 of this revising work, but you cannot be its _body_. America is not
 so different from Europe that my experience cannot profit you for
 your country. Now, medicine teaches us that a soul without a body
 has no life at all, at least upon earth. Perhaps even it is better
 that a woman should be the soul; her moral influence, her earnest
 entreaties near the Governments and authorities are often better
 accepted and consequently more efficacious. I do not therefore see
 any inconvenience that you should be for America the _head of the
 Order, the active working head_,--why not? If you feel to have the
 brain power as much as I know you have the moral power, but then
 create immediately under that head a body, arms to write, to arrange
 methodically, to publish, to keep the correspondence, either alone or
 under your dictation, for copying, etc., after that, feet for running,
 to go, to come, to collect, to buy, to make multitudes of visits and
 receive visitors, as we were obliged to do in Geneva in 1870, where
 during two months my ten rooms were never empty all day long, each one
 containing a secretary, man or woman, to write and to receive a host
 of visits which would have killed a President, and of which hardly
 a quarter had really any other practical use than to enlighten the
 public and to keep up its zeal, not always rational.

 Surround yourself at once with a little body of persons full of
 good-will and capacity, docile to your directions, either women or
 young men, especially doctors. Amongst the latter choose a secretary
 who must be entirely at your service and who probably ought to be paid.

 1. The first work seems to me to be to awaken the attention, the
 sympathy, and the confidence of the public. Without the public, no
 money, and without money no material help. You know as well as myself
 the means to attain this end is publicity, the power of which is, I
 believe, greater in America than in any other country.

 2. Complete study of the practical and sure means to carry an
 efficacious relief to the armies in the Orient. To that effect
 one needs to correspond very often with all the relief committees
 of Russia, of Rumania, of Serbia, of Montenegro, and even of
 Constantinople. It is necessary not to conceal to one’s self that
 these intercourses, easy enough on paper, are very difficult in
 reality, if one does not want the money or the relief to be lost
 to the profit of the war, rather than to the profit of the unhappy
 victims.

 In order to obtain this, and our Committee can be of use to you,
 and between Mr. Moynier and myself we shall do all we can to help
 to enlighten you. But you must also have direct intercourse with
 the relief committees of the different countries which are at this
 moment engaged in the war, although administratively the international
 communications from neutral countries are made by the International
 Committee. You know by experience that many letters are in that
 case lost in the hands of employees, subordinates, or men too much
 occupied, and that one needs to throw the bait often and on several
 sides, at the risk of losing much time.

 3. You must put yourself in direct communication with your President.
 I see in it the use, first, to augment your credit in the country;
 second, especially to obtain that your letters and your sendings be
 given up by persons in high positions and influential, in particular
 ambassadors and consuls. You know that question by your experience in
 the American war better than I do, and I shall not enlarge upon it.

 4. You must have money, and you know the means to procure it. The
 Sanitary Commission has collected sixty millions of francs during your
 war, especially by immense bazaars. In our country bazaars always
 succeed, much more so than collections, and produce three to four
 times as much. They always succeed, while collections oftentimes fail.

 5. Once having the necessary money, the question rises, if it would
 be advisable to choose two commissaries,--for example, two young
 physicians supplied with a recommendation from your President,--who
 should go together to Europe with instructions and _plein-pouvoir_
 from your new Committee, directed to go first to Geneva to the
 International Committee and from there to go directly to the
 Headquarters of the Russian army, in order to make its acquaintance
 and to obtain from it the authorization to circulate in the army
 and to gather all the information necessary for your work. It would
 be desirable that they speak tolerable French, this language being
 the official one in Europe; if they speak and write only English,
 they would lose time and would not always be understood. Those two or
 three commissaries should be posted on the theater seat of the war
 and should give you all the news by an active correspondence. They
 ought probably to engage themselves not to write on politics. I never
 did it in war-time of Italy, Schleswig, and France. Besides these
 commissaries, you need an office or an agency in Europe to whom all
 the relief funds must be addressed and who would take the charge of
 sending them on wherever the commissaries indicate. I do not know what
 our International Committee will decide upon this, but I think it will
 be disposed to be an intermediary between America and the belligerent
 armies, as it has done during the War of 1870 by the agency residing
 at Bâle placed there by us. This agency has received five hundred
 letters, besides other correspondence, every day, either for France or
 Germany. Notice, however, that our Committee wish to show an absolute
 neutrality and should certainly refuse to coöperate in anything like
 a political party. It is, therefore, necessary that your publications
 speak out your intention to remain neutral and to carry the relief
 indifferently to all those who suffer. That will not hinder you to
 correspond more particularly with the Russian army, which for you is
 more accessible, with whom the communications are easier, and for
 whom I believe America has more political sympathy; but you must
 insist on your principle of neutrality in your publications and let
 this position be known in Constantinople, and especially to the
 Committee newly formed in that city. Your commissaries, after their
 arrival at Geneva, might remain there some days in order to study a
 little our library which contains everything that has appeared since
 the beginning of our work. It would be desirable, however, that the
 Committee of the Red Cross in America should buy the principal works,
 and that there should be a commission of several established persons
 who would take it upon themselves to study them and to give an account
 of them; there is a little in every language.

 I have sent you a number of our International Bulletins which appear
 every three months, and in which I have spoken of you. The annual
 subscription being only six francs, your Committee would take two
 subscriptions and by it would know all that is done in the different
 countries. Last year we sent three delegates to Montenegro, an
 interesting little country, where with material help and money we can
 do a great deal of good, and where one is received like a Divinity by
 this enthusiastic population, but which is also jealous and suspicious.

 Our old delegates being at Geneva, yours could receive numerous and
 useful information. Before realizing this ambassador, we had three
 months’ study and treating.

 I send you my discourse made in Brussels, which for your case does
 not contain any immediate application. I might give one to your
 hypothetical delegates as they pass through Geneva.

 As you see, Miss Barton, and honored friend, I began with the idea
 that the American Society of the Red Cross should revise and assure
 its stable existence by an immediate employment of its power through a
 practical application; relief funds to send to the belligerent armies
 of the Oriental War. Once consecrated by action by the remembrance of
 what it has done, its basis will be firmer, its credit more assured,
 and then you will be able to give it a definite form and shape which
 experience will have shown you to be the most useful.

 Not knowing yet what Mr. Moynier has done during my absence, I shall
 not send you the letter which I wish to address to your President, but
 shall do it as soon as I shall have seen him, if he has not already
 done it.

 Write to me at any time concerning the affairs of the Red Cross and
 I shall reply as well as I can, being always in accordance with Mr.
 Moynier’s wishes, who does not know English.

 You would do well to have Mr. Moynier’s pamphlet translated into
 English, “What the Red Cross is.” My little volume, entitled “The
 Surgeon at the Ambulance,” has been translated into English either in
 England or in America; perhaps it would be well to have a new edition
 of it for the circumstance. At last our volume “The War and Charity”
 has also been translated into English. For all our publications of the
 International Committee and its members it suffices to address Mr.
 George, Librarian at Geneva. Perhaps it would be necessary and useful,
 after you have plenty of money and fellow-laborers, to publish every
 three months a small bulletin of your work in one of the good American
 journals.

 And now, my dear Miss Barton, I have talked enough to you about the
 Red Cross. I have given you my ideas provisionally, expecting better
 ones later. You see, I have spoken to you familiarly and with an
 entire confidence and fraternal friendship which our intercourse and
 our common work in Europe has brought forth.

 May God sustain you, if you do undertake this new work, and, in
 entertaining and augmenting your corporal strength and brain power,
 may He continue to inspire you with that moral irresistible power,
 that invincible strength, which He alone can give and which the
 incredulous humanitarian never can give.

 Accept, Miss Barton, and honored friend, the assurance of my
 respectful friendship.

  LOUIS APPIA, DR.


  DANSVILLE, July 1st, 1877

  DOCTEUR LOUIS APPIA

  Membre Comité International de Secours aux
  Militaires blessés, Geneva

  DOCTEUR AND HONORED FRIEND:

 I cannot find the words to properly express to you my gratitude for
 the kind and careful manner in which you have treated my letter. But
 first allow me to thank Madame Appia for her generous part, and all
 the prompt care she took to place it in the proper hands, and let
 me thank both for the excellent photograph, so welcome now, and for
 all the future to be preserved among my choicest and most honored
 keepsakes.

 How kind it was of you, my good friend, to give me so much of your
 time and labor, embodied in that long letter so filled with valuable
 suggestions! If nothing more comes of it, it will at least bring us
 to an understanding in reference to the actual existence and standing
 of the Order of the Red Cross in America. I was extremely guarded
 in my letter, not at all knowing how you stood in regard to your
 selected representative in this country, for I knew you had one, and,
 if you were satisfied, I did not wish to ripple the calm waters of
 confidence and security by even one pebble of discontent or doubt.
 I wrote cautiously like a woman. _You_ have spoken out like a man,
 and it is well. With the pains your Comité have taken, the Red Cross
 should have been known and honored in every household in America
 to-day. It has not _died_ here: it was still-born; it has never once
 gasped on our shores; the nurses to whom you delivered it have never
 even uncovered its face, and America does not know that this holy
 child was ever an applicant for her adoption. She would have received
 it with open arms at the close of our war, when her own wounds
 were unhealed, and her memories fresh and tender. She will be less
 enthusiastic now at the end of a ten years’ peace, and no prospect of
 war. Still, the understanding and heart of the American people will
 lead them to examine and promote whatever cause has for its object
 the benefit of mankind, or the alleviation of human woe. I think I
 know my people, and although, through want of proper opportunities,
 or physical strength, or mental capacity, I may not be able to move
 them in this matter, this fact will in no way affect their general
 character, and, when all things combine for the proper presentation of
 this subject to them by whomsoever it may be, it _will_ be received
 and adopted by them. Your suggestions are excellent and lay out much
 such a field of labor as I had looked forward to, and all this would
 be easy of accomplishment in America, if an urgent necessity existed.
 Until it does, it would be, I suspect, a difficult task to work up
 sufficient enthusiasm, but it was in anticipation of such a necessity
 that I was endeavoring to prepare the way. The simple war between
 Russia and Turkey might not be able to awaken the people, for we
 have a comparatively small element of either nationality among our
 populations, but if other European nations engage and Germany, France,
 and England, or all become involved, the interest in America will be
 scarcely less than on the other side. Then would be a repetition of
 the old sad days of the Franco-Prussian War, when every heart was sad
 and every purse open, they tell me, and half America in mourning.

 Now, my idea was, in anticipation of such a state of affairs in Europe
 as should call for the sympathies and aid of the Americans, to be
 prepared with an organization, which would be only the body of clay,
 like the first man Adam, until the breath of life was breathed into
 its nostrils. This breath would be the necessity and the call for help
 from the suffering fields and peoples of Europe; then it would be well
 that the body were created to receive it. The first step, it seems
 to me, is to find and appoint to the head of the work some person in
 America who will have the spirit, the interest, the enterprise, the
 determination to _push_ the work, and bring it before the country and
 the people, or the honest conscience to resign the position in favor
 of some one who will, and not hold it for years, as an empty honor,
 smothering out its life, and leaving the country in ignorance of its
 existence.

 I am very grateful to you for the kindly interest you take in the
 subject of my health. My sleep, which I know to be the great want,
 is always gaining, and digestion improving, and these without the
 slightest artificial aid. I never took a grain of morphia in my life,
 and probably never in all combined a tablespoonful of medicine to
 produce sleep, and now I take nothing; for the last three years not
 one particle of medicine, relying entirely upon my food, rest, and
 open air for my restoration. All I have gained has been by the aid of
 nature alone; thus I know the foundation is solid and sure. I allow
 nothing to trouble me, as indeed I have no cause for trouble. I walk,
 or work in my garden, or lie on my stretcher like a soldier under the
 trees several hours every day; and here come around me the memories of
 the past, the busy present, and the needful future. I wonder what you
 are all doing over this broad world, and how I can help you. If I find
 myself able to carry on a work I shall do it; if not, I shall endeavor
 to inspire those who are.

  Your friend
  CLARA BARTON


  [_Translation_]

  TO MISS CLARA BARTON
  Dansville, Livingston Co., N.Y.

  MISS BARTON, AND WORTHY FRIEND:

 According to my promise I write to you after having seen Mr. Moynier,
 although I have nothing very new to tell you, and have only to confirm
 what I have written to you in detail. I can therefore be brief this
 second time. Mr. Moynier and myself are equally sympathetic to your
 plan, and we shall be happy if you succeed in founding in America a
 permanent work of the Red Cross. And we shall help you in it with our
 influence to the extent of our power.

 Mr. Moynier has written me that he has already told you so. He
 has added to his communication a suggestion which indeed is very
 important, i.e., that you obtain from the Government of the United
 States the signing of the Convention of Geneva, which has already
 been done by all other civilized states in Europe and out of Europe.
 Without this signature, the private work of the Red Cross is
 paralyzed. Here is an example of what has very recently taken place
 in Montenegro, of which we have asked the signature before putting
 ourselves in relation with it, and before sending to it our three
 delegates with help for their wounded. All succeeded very well, and
 Montenegro has entered eagerly into the general alliance of the
 Convention of Geneva. It will be the same with America, we will hope,
 which has remained back until now. But in order to ensure its success,
 it will probably be necessary to make a summary communication to the
 Government what the Convention of Geneva is, its destiny, and what the
 Red Cross is. You will find all the desirable details upon this point
 in the pamphlets or works which Monsieur Moynier mentions or sends to
 you. It will be necessary that some person take cognizance of this
 work with you, and assist you in it. The Red Cross has existed since
 1863. Since then it has given birth to an entire new literature, so as
 to make by itself a real library.

 And now, my worthy friend, go on courageously with faith and hope.
 The cause is good: let us defend it everywhere and let us be firm in
 upholding the banner of charity. It will be ever the surest means of
 combating the principle of war.

 Write to me when you have done something, with or without translation.
 My previous letter will give you all the details of my manner of
 viewing it.

 As to our participation in your sending of _secours_, I think with
 Mr. Moynier that it would be better that we offer our coöperation
 directly, when we succeed this time in founding an International
 Agency. As formerly in 1870 we have founded one in Basle, which
 has been very active and useful, and consequently if you have any
 substance or provisions to send, it would be better that you send
 directly.

 Besides we shall always be at your service to help and advise you, and
 we shall be very glad to be kept informed what you are doing, and we
 shall publish your work in our trimonthly Bulletin.

 I could not see again Mr. Moynier, but I know he has nothing important
 to add to what I say and to what he has already written to you.
 I believe, therefore, you have from us all the indications and
 information which we can give you. There remains nothing else for me,
 Miss Barton, than to repeat my good wishes for your useful enterprise.
 May you feel your physical strength to keep up and increase, as much
 as your moral, for the good of others and for your own satisfaction.

 I have nothing more to add, and I will not put off any longer this
 last letter.

 Accept, Miss Barton, and worthy friend, the expression of my
 respectful devotion,

  LOUIS APPIA, DR.


 [Rough draft of letter without date, but evidently written about July
 1st, 1877]

  MONSIEUR S. MOYNIER
  Président du Comité International de la Croix rouge

  MY ESTEEMED FRIEND:

 Permit me to thank you, as I do most sincerely, for your kind and
 excellent letter of June 20th, and say how happy I am to find you so
 fully concurring with the ideas I had advanced in relation to the
 action to be taken in the attempted establishment of your beautiful
 Order of the Red Cross in America. It is unnecessary for me to assure
 you that I will do all that lies in my power to accomplish this
 end, believing as I do most implicitly that every step taken toward
 softening and humanizing the conditions of war is a _double_ step
 toward its extirpation from a place among the codes of nations. This
 proves itself by the unfailing fact that the more barbarous a nation
 and the more inhuman its modes of warfare, the more frequent and
 unmitigated its wars. This conviction, added to the strong desire
 which has grown within me to lessen the sufferings of those who must
 compose armies while they do exist among the nations of the earth,
 will prove a sufficient stimulus to all the powers of my nature, and I
 will bring to the object the fullest strength I possess, and then, if
 with your best aid I fail in my purpose, I must be content to submit
 to the inevitable.

 My intelligent friend and your compatriot, Mademoiselle Küpfer, has
 begged to add a letter to you, which I am most thankful for, as
 she can speak to you in your own tongue, and with a clearness of
 expression which I could not. I shall be very busy for the few coming
 hot weeks of August translating the many valuable pamphlets so kindly
 sent me, from which I hope to gather a knowledge of the action of
 the Society and familiarity with its spirit, which may enable me to
 convince my Government of the right and propriety of what we ask it to
 do, the wrong and absurdity of withholding it, and secure from it at
 least an _official reply_ to your invitation to join the Convention.

 I will not make this communication longer, excepting to repeat my
 thanks for your kind letter, and the generous spirit in which it was
 written, and assure you of the great pleasure it will afford me to
 be of never so small a service in a cause so noble and holy. With
 assurances of the highest esteem I remain,

  Most honored Sir
  Very truly
  CLARA BARTON


  DANSVILLE, LIVINGSTON CO., N.Y.
  Sept. 27, 1877

  MONSIEUR MOYNIER
  President

  ESTEEMED SIR:

 Your communication of the 19th August, enclosing a letter addressed
 to the President of the United States, arrived in due time, and my
 impulse was to write at once assuring you how kind and satisfactory I
 found them both to be. But at that moment I hoped it would be possible
 to see the President and present your letter very soon, and thought
 it better to defer my reply to you until this were accomplished, and
 I had some results to communicate. But you will perhaps have observed
 that the President and several members of his Cabinet are making
 very extensive travels over the country this summer, and since the
 arrival of your letter he has never been in Washington or acting in
 his official capacity in any place, long enough for me to reach him.
 We had expected an extra session of Congress to be convened on the 3rd
 of October, which would have ensured his presence in Washington, but
 even _this_ being now uncertain, I feel that I must not longer delay
 my letter to you, with the assurance that it shall be my pleasure to
 present your letter to the President at the earliest moment in which I
 can reach him, and whenever this is done, I shall at once transmit to
 you the results as well as the nature of the interview.

 With kind regards to Dr. Appia and sentiments of the highest esteem
 for yourself,

  I am

  Very truly

  CLARA BARTON


  WASHINGTON, D.C., UNITED STATES
  January 14, 1878

  DOCTOR LOUIS APPIA
  Geneva, Switzerland.

  MY ESTEEMED FRIEND:

 I feel that it is time I should tell you gentlemen of Geneva what I am
 doing or trying to do in America with our favorite subject of the Red
 Cross, but, as my present letter, from the incompleteness of my work,
 cannot take the form of a report, I will address it, not to Monsieur
 Moynier, as the President of the Convention, but familiarly to you, as
 my friend and co-worker.

 I remember to have written in the autumn that I could not get an
 opportunity to present the letter of Monsieur Moynier to our President
 until his summer journeyings were ended. But when he returned to
 Washington in October, I came here also, a distance of some four
 hundred miles, and commenced slowly and carefully my work.

 I found the great difficulty to consist, not in the opposition I
 should meet at first, but in the facts that no one understood the
 subject, and there was no printed literature pertaining to it in the
 language _familiar_ to the people to whom I desired to present it
 (with the exception of our State Department, which is, of course,
 conversant with all languages).

 Thus my only method was to translate, write and rewrite, and explain
 until an understanding and interest were created. I did not think it
 wise to present the letter of Monsieur Moynier to President Hayes
 until the subject was somewhat understood by the parties to whom he
 would be compelled to refer it, viz., the State and War Departments,
 leading members of the Bar, as counsellors, and some of the prominent
 members of Congress. I accordingly commenced with these parties
 myself, explaining the subject, and doing my best to create an
 interest and secure coöperation whenever the matter should come up
 for discussion or decision. From Congress I proceeded to the heads of
 departments and their assistants, and, gaining an audience, explained
 the cause to them one by one. The interviews were frequently very
 long, and I have, with most of them, not only left a full translation
 of the Resolutions, but read them with them, hearing their queries,
 and explaining the practical working of the system as I had seen and
 known it.

 When I thought I had sufficiently guarded the outposts, I ventured to
 ask audience of the President (this was only last week) and presented
 to him the letter of Monsieur Moynier and a copy of the Resolutions.

 President Hayes received the letter with great respect and will refer
 it to the Secretary of State for decision.

 I had previously found, by examination at the State Department, that
 the subject had once come before our Government at the time of the
 Convention in Paris, and been declined by President Grant, and his
 Secretary of State, Mr. Fish, on the ground of danger from _entangling
 alliances_, which it was a fundamental principle of our Government
 to avoid. This record stands in my way, and the greatest difficulty
 I shall have to meet and overcome will be this previous decision.
 If it had never been presented at all, and I had thus no former
 decision to reverse, I should hope for a comparatively easy task, but
 _formalities_ and _courtesies_ stand greatly in the way of reversing
 or setting aside the decisions of a previous authority, and especially
 such authority as General Grant and his popular Secretary, Mr. Fish.
 This adverse decision I hold to have been the result of a hasty and
 improper presentation of the subject without suitable explanation,
 and, from the lack of a full understanding of the system, it was
 considered wisdom on the part of our Government to let it alone.

 Now, I do not despair of success in the end, for I have met only
 the greatest courtesy and most patient attention on the part of all
 officials, and I promised the President that I would wait within call,
 in order to be ready to make any explanations and answer any questions
 which he or the members of his Cabinet might desire to ask. I have
 no definite idea of the length of time they may hold the matter under
 consideration before deciding, but it is so far progressed that my
 own attorney can probably assist me, and he will arrive here in a
 day or two. This is the Honorable Judge Hale, of the State of New
 York, one of the best counsellors in the country, and is not only my
 personal attorney of many years, but also a near relative. I did not
 call him until I had thoroughly prepared the ground, but now that
 the heads of the Government understand the subject properly through
 my explanations, I must wait and let them make their points of law
 upon it and decide. One thing I am certain of, that it would have
 been of very little use for any one to have presented the request in
 an ordinary manner, or who had not time to spend upon it, or was not
 willing to work for the cause. With that previous refusal in the way,
 it will require great care, labor, and perseverance to gain the point
 desired, but I shall not despair until I must. I regret that I have
 not in all this time a more certain progress to report, but I thought
 it proper to let you know what stage of the work I am in, and that
 all that is possible is being done. It is almost three months since
 I left home and came here to work for this cause. My health has not
 suffered, but has held firm beyond any expectation of mine. I must
 think this is largely due to the great kindness and friendly courtesy
 which has been extended to me on every hand. Every official person
 listens patiently to all I have to say, and asks with the greatest
 kindness what I would like him to do to further my wishes or aid my
 cause, and I know that, if in the end the Government refuses to sign,
 it will be only upon a strict point of law, which it feels bound not
 to overstep (after mature deliberation), and it will be grieved to
 feel compelled to disappoint either the members of the Convention or
 myself. The Government of so vast a country as the United States is a
 great body to move, and, in order to accomplish anything under it, it
 is necessary that one have some knowledge of it, some weight with it,
 and an endless patience and perseverance.

 I hope it will not be another three months before I can send some more
 decisive information, which I shall not fail to do at the earliest
 moment.

 My address while in this city will be in the care of that most worthy
 and estimable representative of your Republic, the Honorable John
 Hitz, Consul-General of Switzerland, whose guest I am.

 Begging pardon for so long a letter which tells so little, and hoping
 that this finds both you and Mrs. Appia in excellent health, and with
 most respectful regards to Monsieur Moynier, I remain, my esteemed
 friend,

 With assurances of the highest esteem

  Truly yours

  CLARA BARTON


Armed with this authority, Clara Barton now undertook to secure public
interest in and official recognition for the Red Cross which existed in
Europe, but in America had no existence whatever excepting in her dream
and hope and prayer. There still are extant a very few copies of the
thin little pamphlet which she issued in 1878 addressed to the people
of the United States and the Senators and Representatives in Congress.
It will bear quoting entire. It contains the sum total of the knowledge
which America had of the Red Cross in 1878:

  THE RED CROSS OF THE GENEVA CONVENTION
  WHAT IT IS

  BY CLARA BARTON

 _To the people of the United States, Senators and Representatives in
 Congress_:

Having had the honor conferred upon me of appointment by the Central
Commission holding the Geneva Convention, to present that treaty to
this Government, and to take in charge the formation of a national
organization according to the plan pursued by the committees working
under the treaty, it seems to me but proper, that, while I ask the
Government to sign it, the people and their representatives should be
made acquainted with its origin, designs, methods of work, etc. To
this end I have prepared the following statement, and present it to my
countrymen and women, hoping they will be led to endorse and sustain a
benevolence so grand in its character, and already almost universal in
its recognition and adoption by the civilized world.

  CLARA BARTON

  _Washington, D.C._


 WHAT THE RED CROSS IS

 A confederation of relief societies in different countries, acting
 under the Geneva Convention, carries on its work under the sign of the
 Red Cross. The aim of these societies is to ameliorate the condition
 of wounded soldiers in the armies in campaign on land or sea.

 The societies had their rise in the conviction of certain
 philanthropic men that the official sanitary service in wars is
 usually insufficient, and that the charity of the people, which at
 such times exhibits itself munificently, should be organized for the
 best possible utilization. An international public conference was
 called at Geneva, Switzerland, in 1863, which, though it had not an
 official character, brought together representatives from a number
 of Governments. At this conference a treaty was drawn up, afterward
 remodeled and improved, which twenty-five Governments have signed.

 The treaty provides for the neutrality of all sanitary supplies,
 ambulances, surgeons, nurses, attendants, and sick or wounded men, and
 their safe-conduct, when they bear the sign of the organization, viz.,
 the Red Cross.

 Although the convention which originated the organization was
 necessarily international, the relief societies themselves are
 entirely national and independent; each one governing itself and
 making its own laws according to the genius of its nationality and
 needs.

 It was necessary for recognizance and safety, and for carrying out
 the general provisions of the treaty, that a uniform badge should
 be agreed upon. The Red Cross was chosen out of compliment to the
 Swiss Republic, where the first convention was held, and in which
 the Central Commission has its headquarters. The Swiss colors being
 a white cross on a red ground, the badge chosen was these colors
 reversed.

 There are no “members of the Red Cross,” but only members of societies
 whose _sign_ it is. There is no “_Order of the Red Cross_.” The relief
 societies use, each according to its convenience, whatever methods
 seem best suited to prepare in times of peace for the necessities of
 sanitary service in times of war. They gather and store gifts of money
 and supplies; arrange hospitals, ambulances, methods of transportation
 of wounded men, bureaus of information, correspondence, etc. All that
 the most ingenious philanthropy could devise and execute has been
 attempted in this direction.

 In the Franco-Prussian War this was abundantly tested. That Prussia
 acknowledged its beneficence is proven by the fact that the Emperor
 affixed the Red Cross to the Iron Cross of Merit.

 Although the societies are not international, there is a tacit compact
 between them, arising from their common origin, identity of aim, and
 mutual relation to the treaty. This compact embraces four principles,
 viz., centralization, preparation, impartiality, and solidarity.

 1. _Centralization._ The efficiency of relief in time of war depends
 on unity of direction; therefore in every country the relief societies
 have a common central head to which they send their supplies, and
 which communicates for them with the seat of war or with the surgical
 military authorities, and it is through this central commission they
 have governmental recognition.

 2. _Preparation._ It is understood that societies working under the
 Red Cross shall occupy themselves with preparatory work in times of
 peace. This gives them a permanence they could not otherwise have.

 3. _Impartiality._ The societies of belligerent nations cannot always
 carry aid to their wounded countrymen who are captured by the enemy;
 this is counterbalanced by the regulation that the aid of the Red
 Cross societies shall be extended alike to friend and foe.

 4. _Solidarity._ This provides that the societies of nations not
 engaged in war may afford aid to the sick and wounded of belligerent
 nations without affecting any principle of non-interference to which
 their Governments may be pledged. This must be done through the
 Central Commission, and not through either of the belligerent parties;
 this ensures impartiality of relief.

 That these principles are practical has been thoroughly tested during
 the fifteen years the Red Cross has existed.

 The Convention of Geneva does not exist as a society, but is simply
 a treaty under which all the relief societies of the Red Cross are
 enabled to carry on their work effectually. In time of war, the
 members and agents of the societies who go to the seat of war are
 obliged to have their badges _vizéed_ by the Central Commission, and
 by one of the belligerents--this is in order to prevent fraud. Thus
 the societies and the treaty complement each other. The societies find
 and execute the relief, the treaty affords them the immunities which
 _enable_ them to execute.

 And it may be further made a part of the _raison d’être_ of these
 national relief societies to afford ready succor and assistance to
 sufferers in time of national or widespread calamities, such as
 plagues, cholera, yellow fever and the like, devastating fires or
 floods, railway disasters, mining catastrophes, etc. The readiness
 of organizations like those of the Red Cross to extend help at the
 instant of need renders the aid of quadruple value and efficiency
 compared with that gathered hastily and irresponsibly, in the
 bewilderment and shock which always accompanies such calamities. The
 trained nurses and attendants subject to the relief societies in
 such cases would accompany the supplies sent and remain in action as
 long as needed. Organized in every State, the relief societies of
 the Red Cross would be ready with money, nurses, and supplies, to
 go on call to the instant relief of all who were overwhelmed by any
 of those sudden calamities which occasionally visit us. In case of
 yellow fever, there being an organization in every State, the nurses
 and attendants would be first chosen from the nearest societies, and,
 being acclimated, would incur far less risk to life than if sent
 from distant localities. It is true that the Government is always
 ready in these times of public need to furnish transportation, and
 often does much more. In the Mississippi flood, a few years ago, it
 ordered rations distributed under the direction of army officers;
 in the case of the explosion at the navy yard, it voted a relief
 fund, and in our recent affliction at the South, a like course was
 pursued. But in such cases one of the greatest difficulties is that
 there is no organized method of administering the relief which the
 Government or liberal citizens are willing to bestow, nor trained and
 acclimated nurses ready to give intelligent care to the sick; or,
 if there be organization, it is hastily formed in the time of need,
 and is therefore comparatively inefficient and wasteful. It would
 seem to be full time that, in consideration of the growth and rapidly
 accumulating necessities of our country, we should learn to economize
 our charities, and ensure from them the greatest possible practical
 benevolence. Although we in the United States may fondly hope to be
 seldom visited by the calamities of war, yet the misfortunes of other
 nations with which we are on terms of amity appeal to our sympathies;
 our southern coasts are periodically visited by the scourge of yellow
 fever; the valleys of the Mississippi are subject to destructive
 inundations; the plains of the West are devastated by insects and
 drought, and our cities and country are swept by consuming fires.
 In all such cases, to gather and dispense the profuse liberality of
 our people, without waste of time or material, requires the wisdom
 that comes of experience and permanent organization. Still more does
 it concern, if not our safety, at least our honor, to signify our
 approval of those principles of humanity acknowledged by every other
 civilized nation.




CHAPTER VIII

THE BIRTH OF THE AMERICAN RED CROSS


It is important that this book shall make plain, by means of all
necessary emphasis, and if need be by reiteration, that the United
States did not come automatically or promptly into the sisterhood of
nations associated under the banner of the Red Cross. From 1864 until
1881 was a period of seventeen years. The United States was the last
of the great civilized nations of the world to ratify the treaty. It
is also important to make plain that the work of securing this tardy
recognition of the Red Cross on the part of the United States did not
devolve upon an organization in this country, or upon a group of people
laboring together. If ever a great enterprise came into being as the
result of the persistent, indefatigable effort of one person, that
result was achieved by Clara Barton in securing the adhesion of her own
country to the international agreement which included the Red Cross.

Clara Barton undertook to secure national recognition for this
organization during the administration of President Rutherford B.
Hayes. She had already begun work in this direction as early as 1876,
and it seemed that she had every requisite for success when, in 1877,
President Moynier addressed an official letter to President Hayes
informing him of Miss Barton’s appointment, and asking that the United
States come into the agreement. But the promised success was delayed.

President Hayes received Miss Barton at the White House, and listened
courteously but not enthusiastically to her story. So did the
Attorney-General of the United States, the Honorable Charles Devens,
to whom the President referred her, and who found no serious legal
obstacle in the way of her desire. Each sent her with a note of
introduction to the Secretary of State. President Hayes wrote the
following little note:

  EXECUTIVE MANSION
  WASHINGTON, 4 Jany, 1878

  MY DEAR SIR:

 Miss Clara Barton of New York State has some plans regarding the
 mitigation of the cruelties of war which she wishes to present to you.
 Please give her a hearing and such aid and encouragement as may be
 deemed by you fit.

  Sincerely
  R. B. HAYES

  HON. W. M. EVARTS
  _etc., etc._


But the movement encountered apathy and quiet but determined
opposition, and resulted in no executive action.

In a little scratch-book I find Clara Barton’s own account of this
disappointment. Her narrative goes back to Civil War days and then
proceeds with her experience overseas, and her service in the
Franco-Prussian War:

 As I journeyed on and saw the work of the Red Cross Society, more
 accomplished in four months under their systematic organization than
 in our four years without it, no mistakes, no needless suffering, no
 starving, no lack of care, no waste, no confusion,--all busy and at
 work, a whole continent marshaled under the banner of the Red Cross,
 working instead of weeping, nursing instead of waiting,--as I saw all
 this and journeyed and worked with it, I said to myself, “If I live to
 return to my country I will try to let her people understand the Red
 Cross.” I did more than resolve; I promised other nations I would do
 it. In 1873 I returned, more broken than I went. There had been years
 of helplessness in which I forgot how to walk; still I remembered
 my resolution and my promise. I came to Dansville and I brought that
 resolution and that promise with me. After about two years I was able
 to go to Washington with a letter from the International Committee of
 Geneva to the President of the United States asking once more that
 America sign the Treaty of Geneva.

 Being made the official bearer of this letter, I presented it in 1877
 in person to President Hayes. He received it kindly and referred it
 and me to his Secretary of State, Mr. Evarts, who in his turn referred
 it to his Assistant Secretary, Mr. Frederick Seward, as the person
 who would know all about it, examine it, and report for decision. Mr.
 Seward had been the Assistant Secretary of his father and of Secretary
 Fish when it had been previously presented. He remembered this refusal
 and referred me to the record. He regarded it as a settled thing. I
 saw that it was all made to depend on one man, and that man regarded
 it as settled. I had nothing to hope for then, but did not press the
 matter to a third refusal. It waited and so did I.

Nor had she any better success in her approach to members of Congress.
They were either apathetic or positively hostile. They knew nothing
about the Red Cross and they cared less. The United States was not
going to have any more wars. If it ever should have any wars, this
country would manage them in its own way. It did not care that any
one in Europe should tell it how to provide for the care of sick and
wounded men. As for relief to be sent from America to any countries
in Europe that might be in war, the American people were fully
competent to create their own agencies on this side of the water, and
to distribute relief through such agencies as they might select or
constitute upon the other side.

Even Miss Barton’s staunch friends in the Senate and in the House could
give her very little aid or comfort. If she could enlist the interest
of the President or of the Secretary of State, something might
possibly be done. Otherwise, it was useless to try.

So far as is known, Clara Barton’s little eight-page pamphlet, issued
in 1878, had no more effect than Dr. Bellows’s sixteen-page pamphlet
in 1866. If a single newspaper had taken it up and commented favorably
upon it, Clara Barton would have been practically certain to have
clipped and treasured the article or editorial. There is not in her
papers a single letter or newspaper clipping which indicates that any
man, woman, or child in the United States responded favorably to her
published letter which was quoted in the last chapter. She used her pen
and her voice and her power of personal persuasion without avail. The
seed of that sowing appeared to fall upon the rocks, and it took no
root.

In November, 1880, James A. Garfield was elected President of the
United States. Miss Barton knew him somewhat. She wrote him a letter
of congratulation, to which he returned a brief but gracious reply.
Soon after his inauguration she called on him at the White House and
presented the following letter which nearly four years before she had
brought to the attention of President Hayes:

  INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE
  RELIEF OF WOUNDED SOLDIERS
  GENEVA, August 19, 1877

  _To the President of the United States, at Washington_:

 Mr. PRESIDENT: The International Committee of the Red Cross desires
 most earnestly that the United States should be associated with them
 in their work, and they take the liberty of addressing themselves to
 you, with the hope that you will second their efforts. In order that
 the functions of the National Society of the Red Cross be faithfully
 performed, it is indispensable that it should have the sympathy and
 protection of the Government.

 It would be irrational to establish an association upon the principles
 of the Convention of Geneva, without the association having the
 assurance that the army of its own country, of which it should be
 an auxiliary, would be guided, should the case occur, by the same
 principles. It would consequently be useless for us to appeal to the
 people of the country, inasmuch as the United States, as a Government,
 has made no declaration of adhering officially to the principles laid
 down by the Convention of the 22d August, 1864.

 Such is, then, Mr. President, the principal object of the present
 request. We do not doubt but this will meet with a favorable reception
 from you, for the United States is in advance of Europe upon the
 subject of war, and the celebrated “Instructions of the American Army”
 are a monument which does honor to the United States.

 You are aware, Mr. President, that the Government of the United States
 was officially represented at the Conference of Geneva, in 1864, by
 two delegates, and this mark of approbation given to the work which
 was being accomplished was then considered by every one as a precursor
 of a legal ratification. Until the present time, however, this
 confirmation has not taken place, and we think that this formality,
 which would have no other bearing than to express publicly the
 acquiescence of the United States in those humanitarian principles now
 admitted by all civilized people, has only been retarded because the
 occasion has not offered itself. We flatter ourselves with the hope
 that appealing directly to your generous sentiments will determine you
 to take the necessary measures to put an end to a situation so much to
 be regretted. We only wait such good news, Mr. President, in order to
 urge the founding of an American Society of the Red Cross.

 We have already an able and devoted assistant in Miss Clara Barton, to
 whom we confide the care of handing to you this present request.

 It would be very desirable that the projected asseveration should be
 under your distinguished patronage, and we hope that you will not
 refuse us this favor.

 Receive, Mr. President, the assurance of our highest consideration.

 For the International Committee:

  G. MOYNIER, President


President Garfield heard her story with genuine cordiality. He knew her
and the work she had done both in this country and abroad. He assured
her of his warm personal interest and referred her to the Secretary of
State for a further discussion of the matter. His note was brief and to
the point:

  EXECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON

 Will the Sec’y of State please hear Miss Barton on the subject herein
 referred to?

  J. A. GARFIELD

  March 30, 1881


It was several days before Clara Barton succeeded in securing an
appointment with Secretary Blaine; she did not want merely to present
the President’s note, but to have time to tell the story of the Red
Cross. Mr. Blaine agreed to see her on Monday, April 11, 1881. Her
nephew, Stephen, who had come to Washington for a few days, accompanied
her on this visit; and it is fully recorded in his diary. The beginning
of the interview was not encouraging; for Mr. Blaine, after appointing
the time, apparently forgot about it, and was occupied when they called.

The appointment had been made for 11.30 at the Department of State.
Clara and Stephen waited for an hour in the Diplomatic Chamber. At the
end of that time Mr. Blaine came in accompanied by Mrs. Dr. Loring, of
Massachusetts. Introductions ensued, Mrs. Loring said she would “esteem
it an honor to make the acquaintance of Miss Barton,” and arranged for
an interchange of calls. Mr. Blaine referred to Miss Barton’s call
at his residence, and “hoped it would not be the last.” Mrs. Loring
then withdrew, and Mr. Blaine apologized for having kept Miss Barton
waiting. She told him the nature of her visit and presented the letter
of President Garfield. Mr. Blaine told her that he knew practically
nothing about the Red Cross, and asked her to state briefly its object.
He thought it would come more clearly under the supervision of the
Secretary of War, but she explained the necessity for the treaty. The
international aspect of the organization had not previously occurred
to Mr. Blaine; he had supposed it would be purely an American Society
operating under the War Department; and that any encouragement given by
the Secretary of State would be incidental and personal; Miss Barton
replied that if he could give her time she would like to tell him in
detail what was involved in the relation of the United States to the
Red Cross. He replied, “Miss Barton, I can give you all the time you
need.”

Clara then told him the whole story from beginning to end, and Mr.
Blaine listened with intent interest.

He inquired why President Hayes had not pushed the matter to a
successful conclusion, and she told him of Mr. Seward’s objections
which went back to his father’s secretaryship in Civil War days, and
based upon the Monroe Doctrine.

Mr. Blaine replied that “the Monroe Doctrine was not made to ward off
humanity.” He told her that “the grounds for Mr. Seward’s objection
would not stand in the way of the present Administration.” He assured
her that he was “in full sympathy with her proposal,” and promised
her that he “would coöperate fully with her in carrying the matter
successfully through.” As for the official letter from M. Moynier,
he assured her that he would be prepared to reply to that letter
approvingly now on the sole basis of her statement of the case; but he
said that he wanted to do more than this.

She replied that she knew it would be necessary for the Senate to
approve. He told her, “if it needed the action of the Senate, that
could be had.” The confidence with which he spoke was most reassuring.
He asked her to leave her little pamphlet with him for a few days
that he might become a little more familiar with the history of the
movement. It was all new to him; but it was obviously a thing in which
the United States should have its part with other nations; he could
promise her that it would be done, and done promptly.

Mr. Blaine suggested that it would be well for Miss Barton to talk over
the matter of the Red Cross with the Secretary of War. On the following
day she went by appointment to see Secretary Robert T. Lincoln. Again
Stephen accompanied her and made a record of it.

Miss Barton first expressed to Mr. Lincoln her appreciation of the
kindness of his father. Stephen wrote, “He was much affected and very
grateful.”

The adhesion of the United States to the treaty was a matter for the
State Department; but Robert Lincoln was greatly interested, and
assured Miss Barton of his support in the operation of the Red Cross in
case the Administration agreed to it.

In the next few days she made calls on other members of the Cabinet.
Nowhere did she encounter opposition or apathy. The interest of
President Garfield and Secretary Blaine appeared to be contagious. All
official Washington seemed suddenly to have wakened to the importance
of the Red Cross. She called upon several Senators and was introduced
by Senator Conger, who told them of Clara Barton’s work in Michigan.
With this introduction and a knowledge of the President’s approval,
they met her with prompt and unreserved approval of her plans. Most of
them had never heard of the Red Cross, but, when she told them how many
other nations had approved it, and that the President and Secretary of
State were ready to approve the treaty, they gave her on the spot their
heartiest endorsement. She thought she understood Secretary Blaine’s
complete confidence that the Senate would ratify the treaty as a matter
of course.

More than a month elapsed before anything else occurred. Nothing
unfavorable developed. On the other hand, neither the President nor Mr.
Blaine took any immediate steps. The Conkling difficulty had arisen and
both Garfield and Blaine had many other things to think about. Clara
Barton began to wonder whether she could induce the Senate to remind
the Secretary of State of his interest in the matter.

On May 17, 1881, the Honorable Omar D. Conger, of Michigan, submitted
to the United States Senate the following resolution:

 RESOLVED, That the Secretary of State be requested to furnish to the
 Senate copies (translations) of the Articles of Convention signed at
 Geneva, Switzerland, August 22, 1864, touching the treatment of those
 wounded in war, together with the forms of ratification employed by
 the several Governments, parties thereto.

It took a little time for the Department of State to gather the
documents necessary to answer the request of the Senate. But Secretary
Blaine did not wait for this formality. He remembered that there was
an earnest little woman awaiting some definite answer from him, and he
sent her the following letter:

  DEPARTMENT OF STATE,
  WASHINGTON, May 20, 1881

  MISS CLARA BARTON
  American Representative of the Red Cross, etc.
  Washington.

  DEAR MADAM:

 I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the letter addressed
 by Mr. Moynier, President of the Red Cross International Convention,
 to the President of the United States, bearing the date of the 19th
 August, 1877, and referred by president Garfield on the 30th March,
 1881, to this Department.

 It appears from a careful perusal of the letter that Mr. Moynier is
 anxious that the Government of the United States should join with
 other Governments of the world in this International Convention.

 Will you be pleased to say to Mr. Moynier, in reply to his letter,
 that the President of the United States and the officers of this
 Government are in full sympathy with anywise measures tending
 toward the amelioration of the suffering incident to warfare? The
 Constitution of the United States has, however, lodged the entire
 war-making power in the Congress of the United States; and as the
 participation of the United States in an International Convention of
 this character is consequent upon and auxiliary to the war-making
 power of the Nation, legislation by Congress is needful to accomplish
 the humane end that your society has in view. It gives me, however,
 great pleasure to state that I shall be happy to give any measures
 which you may propose careful attention and consideration, and
 should the President, as I doubt not he will, approve of the matter,
 the Administration will recommend to Congress the adoption of the
 international treaty which you desire.

 I am, madam, with very great respect, your obedient servant,

  JAMES G. BLAINE


It would be interesting to know just how Clara Barton received the
news. Unfortunately, her diary affords us no information. She must have
gone forth from the office of the Secretary of State with wings upon
her feet. There still would be months before Congress could act, but
she sent the glad news at once to President Moynier and received from
him an official reply which she transmitted to the Secretary of State.

  GENEVA, June 13, 1881

  _To the Honorable the Secretary of State_
  JAMES G. BLAINE, _Washington_

 SIR: Miss Clara Barton has just communicated to me the letter which
 she has had the honor to receive from you, bearing date of May 23,
 1881, and I hasten to express to you how much satisfaction I have
 experienced from it. I do not doubt now, thanks to your favorable
 consideration and that of President Garfield, that the United States
 may soon be counted among the number of signers of the Geneva
 Convention, since you have been kind enough to allow me to hope that
 the proposition for it will be made to Congress by the Administration.

 I thank you, as well as President Garfield, for having been willing
 to take into serious consideration the wish contained in my letter of
 August 19, 1877, assuredly a very natural wish, since it tended to
 unite your country with a work of charity and civilization for which
 it is one of the best qualified.

 Since my letter of 1877 was written, several new governmental
 adhesions have been given to the Geneva Convention, and I think that
 these precedents will be much more encouraging to the United States
 from the fact that they have been given by America. It was under the
 influence of events of the recent war of the Pacific that Bolivia
 signed the treaty the 16th of October, 1879, Chili on the 15th of
 November, 1879, Argentine Republic on the 25th of November, 1879, and
 Peru on the 22d of April, 1881. This argument in favor of the adhesion
 of your country is the only one I can add to my request, and to the
 printed documents that Miss Barton has placed in your hands, to aid
 your judgment and that of Congress.

 I now await with full confidence the final result of your sympathetic
 efforts, and I beg you to accept, sir, the assurance of my high
 consideration.

  G. MOYNIER, President


There lies before me as I write a little pad of paper, about three
by five inches in size, of which more than half the sheets have been
used and torn off, and of the remainder all but the top six leaves
are blank. Those six pages are filled with writing in pencil, and
the writing is that of Clara Barton. It is just such a pad as she
habitually kept by her hard and narrow cot, with a candle and a pencil
at hand, so that when she woke in the night she might sit up and
write the thoughts that came to her. She seldom retired before eleven
o’clock, and was habitually up as early as five, but if she had waking
hours between, and she often had them, she wrote down what was in her
mind, put out the candle, and finished what was for her a good night’s
rest by sunrise or before.

“In almost any part of the world except the United States,” the tablet
begins, “the words Red Cross, and the emblem for which they stand,
would be as familiar as are to us the words Internal Revenue or
National Board of Health.”

Was there ever such a time? Most of us have forgotten whether there is
a National Board of Health, but “the words Red Cross, and the emblem
for which they stand,” have become as familiar as the Stars and Stripes.

Yet there was a time when all other countries knew of it, but in the
United States we knew of Internal Revenue and of the National Board of
Health, but not of the Red Cross!

The little tablet is not dated, but I have no difficulty in supplying
the date. These six pages were penciled on a night between June 9 and
July 1, 1881. They appear to have been intended as the basis of an
article for the Associated Press, endeavoring to call a little more
attention to the fact that on May 21 of that year the American Red
Cross had actually been organized and that on June 9 it had elected
officers. The Associated Press had sent out a paragraph announcing the
organization, May 21, and this was to tell that “A subsequent meeting
has been held, and the following officers elected: President, Miss
Clara Barton; secretary, George Kennan,” and so on. She might have
told, but did not, that her own name as president was presented by
President Garfield himself.

She had to explain what the Red Cross was for, although “During the
last three or four years the public eye has been growing familiar with
the term,” through constant efforts to secure for it such recognition
in America as it long had had abroad.

“Nation after nation has recognized its benign mission,” the narrative
runs on, “until twenty-seven countries have welcomed, received, and
incorporated its humane principle into laws which govern their rules of
warfare. In twenty-seven lands, wherever the national emblem is thrown
to the breeze in token of war, there floats beside it this beautiful
emblem of mercy, pity, justice, charity, and neutral care for the
wounded, comfort for the dying, and burial for the dead. To us alone it
is a stranger. For seventeen years it has knocked at our door, but our
great, noisy family failed to hear.”

That was her first great triumph!

So she obtained her official recognition, and then on the very next
day held her meeting for organization, and that fall secured her
incorporation, and the next year the treaty, and so on, and so on, one
step leading to another; and when she had gotten the consent of the
White House, she undertook to educate the great American Republic, and
let them know what the Red Cross stood for. She hoped the time would
come when the name and symbol would be as well known in America as the
words Internal Revenue or National Board of Health.

She had no publicity organization, nor press committee; but one night
she sat up in bed, lighted her candle, took her little pad and pencil,
and began to write:

“In almost any part of the world except the United States of America
the words Red Cross, and the emblem for which it stands, would be as
familiar--” and so on.

She did not finish the article in this form, though I find what use
she made of it later in that year, in a pamphlet entitled “A Sketch of
the History of the Red Cross.” That document was reissued with added
material in 1883, after the adoption of the international treaty. The
two lie before me, the completed pamphlet, with the endorsement of
Secretary Blaine, and the nomination, by President Garfield himself,
of Clara Barton to be president of the American Red Cross Association,
and the three-cent pencil tablet on which Clara Barton began, on one
night very soon after June 9, 1881, to teach the great American people
what the words Red Cross and its emblem were intended to represent. She
was not much given to weeping, but her tears would have wet through
the little pad of paper many times before she accomplished what she
undertook. But she succeeded. She lived to see the name and emblem
of the Red Cross as familiar in her own country as in any of the
twenty-seven that had previously adopted it. And that was what she
hoped and prayed to do.

It will be noted that all these documents from the President and the
Secretary of State, on the one hand, and from President Moynier and
Dr. Appia on the other, are addressed to Clara Barton. So far as is
now known there was no other person in America to whom they might have
been properly addressed. From the time when she returned from the
Franco-Prussian War until the President and the Congress of the United
States had officially approved the Red Cross, and the Senate had agreed
to the Treaty of Geneva, there was, so far as is known, precisely one
Red Cross in the United States, and that was the one which Clara Barton
had brought back from the red fields of France.

Not only so, but so far as is now known, in all those years no other
voice than hers, after Dr. Bellows gave up hope, was raised on behalf
of it. No one else had a vision of its possible relation to the future
life of the United States. One little woman, barely recovered from her
nervous prostration, trudged wearily from desk to desk in Washington,
and with voice and pen pleaded in season and out of season until the
American Red Cross became a fact.

Yes, the American Red Cross was now a fact. The President had
consented; the Secretary of State had become an enthusiastic
protagonist of the treaty; the Secretary of War heartily favored it;
and the entire Senate appeared a unit in its favor. The preliminary
resolution had passed the Senate without a single dissenting voice.
There were certain formalities which needed to be completed before the
treaty could actually be signed and ratified, but that was not worth
worrying about. President Garfield and Secretary Blaine encouraged Miss
Barton to go straight ahead and complete her organization.

She asked President Garfield to become the president of the American
Red Cross, but he declined. She told him that in other countries kings
and chief magistrates were its presidents; but President Garfield
thought he knew a person to whom that honor belonged in America. When
the American Red Cross was actually organized, Clara Barton was made
its president on nomination of James A. Garfield, President of the
United States.

On the very next day after receipt of Secretary Blaine’s letter, Clara
Barton held a meeting and organized a National Society of the Red
Cross. The society was duly and promptly incorporated under the laws of
the District of Columbia.

At a subsequent meeting, held on the 9th of June, 1881, the following
officers were elected:

  Miss Clara Barton, _President_.
  Judge William Lawrence, _First Vice-President_.
  Dr. Alexander Y. P. Garnett, _Vice-President of the District of
   Columbia_.
  A. S. Solomons, _Treasurer_.
  George Kennan, _Secretary_.

EXECUTIVE BOARD

  Judge William Lawrence, _Chairman_.
  Dr. George B. Loring.
  Gen. S. D. Sturgis.
  Mrs. S. A. Martha Canfield.
  Mr. Walter P. Phillips.
  Miss Clara Barton.
  Mr. Walker Blaine.
  Col. Richard J. Hinton.
  Mrs. F. B. Taylor.
  Mr. Wm. F. Sliney.
  Mr. John R. Van Wormer.
  Gen. R. D. Mussey, _Consulting Counsel of the Association_.
  Miss Clara Barton, _Corresponding Secretary_.

Nothing could have seemed more auspicious than the outlook of the
American Red Cross on the day of its organization. It had the support
of the President, his Cabinet, and the Senate, and its birth was hailed
with satisfaction by all civilized nations. The signing and approval
of the treaty appeared a trivial formality.

Just when everything was proceeding finely, President Garfield was shot
by a fanatic on July 2, 1881. He lingered through the summer, and on
September 19th he died.

The Red Cross Treaty had not been signed.




CHAPTER IX

THE TRIALS OF A TREATY


The methods of treaty-making in the United States have varied. In
a few instances the Senate has taken the initiative and asked the
President’s concurrent action. In at least one instance the President
has negotiated the treaty without the assistance of the Senate and
requested the Senate to adopt it without change. In several cases the
coördinate treaty-making powers have moved together, the President
concurring with the Senate’s Committee on Foreign Relations. In the
matter of the Red Cross Treaty, as we have seen, the President took the
initiative in coöperation with the Secretary of State, and the Senate
in due time requested the Secretary of State to submit the documents
bearing upon the matter. This was the status when President Garfield
was shot. During the weeks of his illness the Nation’s interest
centered in his sick-room.

It is interesting to know that the first local organization of the Red
Cross was established at Dansville, New York. Clara Barton returned
thither after the shooting of President Garfield, and without waiting
for his death or recovery, called the people of that village together
and established a local organization, the first in the United States.
Some years afterward the Dansville “Express” went back over its files
and found material for this brief article:


THE RED CROSS IN DANSVILLE

_The First Local Society in the United States was Organized in
Dansville_

 From the files of the Dansville Express of Aug. 25, 1881, we find the
 first local Red Cross Society in the United States was organized in
 this village Aug. 22d, 1881, at a meeting held in St. Paul’s Lutheran
 Church, called for that purpose. Rev. P. A. Strobel, pastor of the
 church, presided and Dr. B. P. Andrews acted as secretary. Miss Clara
 Barton, then a resident of Dansville, explained the objects of the
 society.

 Rev. Geo. K. Ward, Dr. J. H. Jackson, Rev. P. A. Strobel, Rev. A. P.
 Brush, Mrs. Mary R. Smith, and Mrs. James Faulkner, Jr., were made
 a committee to present a constitution, and they reported the same.
 Wm. Kramer and Dr. J. H. Jackson were a committee to secure names of
 members and 57 were recorded.

 The officers elected were: President--Geo. A. Sweet;
 vice-president--Mrs. Fanny B. Johnson; secretary--Mrs. Mary Colvin;
 treasurer--Jas. Faulkner, Jr., executive board--Miss Clara Barton,
 Major Mark J. Bunnell, G. Bastian, Jas. H. Jackson, Major E. H. Pratt,
 Mrs. Geo. Hartman, Thomas E. Gallagher, Wm. Kramer, Oscar Woodruff,
 Mrs. Reuben Whiteman, Mrs. L. Q. Galpin.

 Later, Major Bunnell was made secretary of the executive board and
 Hon. J. A. VanDerlip consulting counsel.

 The society was active in good works for a few years and when Miss
 Barton moved to Washington it was allowed to die.

Soon after the inauguration of President Arthur, Clara Barton returned
to Washington from a summer spent at Dansville. She was already
acquainted with President Arthur; she had met him at the White House,
and he had expressed interest in her undertaking. She now called on
him again and reminded him that President Garfield had promised her
his assistance; that there already had gone forth a letter signed by
the Secretary of State, committing the United States to the Red Cross
Treaty; and that there still lay on the President’s desk the official
request of the Senate for information concerning the Treaty of Geneva.

President Arthur gave to Miss Barton a most cordial reception. He
assured her of his own personal interest and of the obligation under
which he felt to carry out every promise made by President Garfield.
He promised her to call the attention of the Senate to the matter in
his first address to Congress, and he kept his promise in the following
paragraphs:

 I cannot too strongly urge upon you my conviction that every
 consideration of national safety, economy, and honor imperatively
 demands a thorough rehabilitation of our Navy.

 We have for many years maintained with foreign Governments the
 relations of honorable peace, and that such relations may be permanent
 is desired by every patriotic citizen of the Republic.

 But if we heed the teachings of history we shall not forget that in
 the life of every nation emergencies may arise when a resort to arms
 can alone save it from dishonor.

 No danger from abroad now threatens this people, nor have we any cause
 to distrust the friendly professions of other Governments.

 But, for avoiding as well as for repelling dangers that may threaten
 us in the future, we must be prepared to enforce any policy which we
 think wise to adopt.

 At its last extra session the Senate called for the text of the
 Geneva Convention for the relief of the wounded in war. I trust that
 this action foreshadows such interest in the subject as will result
 in the adhesion of the United States to that humane and commendable
 engagement.

This part of the message was immediately taken up in the Senate and
referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, consisting of the
following named gentlemen, to wit: Hon. William Windom, Minnesota;
Hon. George F. Edmunds, Vermont; Hon. John Miller, California; Hon.
Thomas W. Ferry, Michigan; Hon. Elbridge G. Lapham, New York; Hon.
John W. Johnston, Virginia; Hon. J. T. Morgan, Alabama; Hon. George H.
Pendleton, Ohio; Hon. Benjamin H. Hill, Georgia.

The Committee on Foreign Relations opened its door wide to Clara Barton
and listened with the greatest interest to her story. President Arthur
followed the recommendation of his message with a special communication
in response to the Senate’s request of the preceding May:

 (Senate Ex. Doc. No. 6, 47th Congress, 1st Session)

 Message from the President of the United States, transmitting in
 response to Senate resolution of May 17th, 1881, a report of the
 Secretary of State, with accompanying papers, touching the Geneva
 Convention for the relief of the wounded in war.

December 12, 1881.--Referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations and
ordered to be printed.

_To Senate of the United States_:

I transmit herewith, in response to the resolution of the Senate of
the seventeenth of May last, a report of the Secretary of State, with
accompanying papers, touching the Geneva Convention for the relief of
the wounded in war.

  CHESTER A. ARTHUR

  EXECUTIVE MANSION
  WASHINGTON, _December 12, 1881_


  _To the President_:

 The Secretary of State, to whom was addressed a resolution of the
 Senate, dated the seventeenth of May, 1881, requesting him “to furnish
 to the Senate copies (translations) of Articles of Convention signed
 at Geneva, Switzerland, August 22, 1864, touching the treatment of
 those wounded in war, together with the forms of ratification employed
 by the several governments, parties thereto,” has the honor to lay
 before the President the papers called for by the resolution.

 In view of the reference made, in the annual message of the
 President, to the Geneva convention, the Secretary of State deems it
 unnecessary now to enlarge upon the advisability of the adhesion of
 the United States to an international compact at once so humane in its
 character and so universal in its application as to commend itself to
 the adoption of nearly all the civilized powers.

  JAMES G. BLAINE

  DEPARTMENT OF STATE
  WASHINGTON, _December 10, 1881_


With such support from the President and the Secretary of State,
and with the Senate a unit in support of the treaty, the end of the
struggle appeared to be in sight. But many anxious months had yet to
pass before Clara Barton’s dream came true.

Even after the movement was inaugurated and recognized by Congress,
very few people in America attached to it any considerable degree of
importance. Among those who appreciated its full significance and
hastened to give Clara Barton full credit for her splendid achievement
was the man who had labored so faithfully for the organization of an
American Red Cross at the close of the Civil War, Dr. Henry W. Bellows.
He had labored in earlier years and had given it up, but rejoiced in
the prospect of her success:

  NEW YORK, 232 E. 15
  Nov. 21, 1881

  MY DEAR MISS BARTON:

 It has been a sore disappointment and mortification to those who
 inaugurated the plan of organized relief, by private contributions,
 for sick and wounded soldiers in our late war, since so largely
 followed by other nations, that they should still find the United
 States the _only_ great Government that refuses to join in the treaty,
 framed by the International Convention of Geneva, for neutralizing
 battle-fields after the battle, and making the persons of surgeons
 and nurses flying to the relief of the wounded and dying free from
 arrest. This great international agreement for mitigating the horrors
 of war finds its chief defect in the conspicuous refusal of the
 United States Government to join in the treaty! The importance of our
 national concurrence with other Governments in this noble treaty has
 been urged upon every administration since the war, but has thus far
 met only the reply that our national policy did not allow us to enter
 into entangling alliances with other powers. I rejoice to hear from
 you that our late President and his chief official advisers were of a
 different opinion, and encouraged the hope that in the interests of
 mercy and humanity it might be safe to agree by treaty with all the
 civilized world, that we would soften to non-combatants the hateful
 conditions that made relief to the wounded on battle-fields a peril
 or forbidden act. I trust you will press this matter upon our present
 administration with all the weight of your well-earned influence.
 Having myself somewhat ignominiously failed to get any encouragement
 for this measure from two administrations, I leave it, in your more
 fortunate hands, hoping that the time is ripe for a less jealous
 policy than American self-isolation in international movements for
 extending and universalizing mercy towards the victims of war.

  Yours truly
  H. W. BELLOWS


Public sentiment in America is a strange and somewhat capricious thing.
Clara Barton issued her little booklet in 1878 and it appeared to fall
flat. The newspapers paid no attention to it; Congress treated it with
complete indifference if not with hostility, and the President and his
Cabinet ignored it. She reissued it in 1881 with added matter, and
not less than three hundred newspapers and periodicals spoke kindly
of it, many of them more than once, so that more than five hundred
press clippings were collated as the result of that and Miss Barton’s
little article written for the Associated Press. Congress, that had
been partly hostile and where not hostile apathetic, became suddenly
and unanimously interested. The Honorable William Windom, Chairman of
the Committee on Foreign Relations, and afterward a member of President
Garfield’s Cabinet, became a stanch friend, perhaps the first genuinely
interested and largely influential friend of the movement. Senators
Hoar and Wilson, of Massachusetts, and Hawley, of Connecticut, and
Edmunds, of Vermont, lent to the movement intelligent and vigorous
support. The Honorable Omar D. Conger, of Michigan, first in the
House and afterward in the Senate, took an active part in promoting
the cause. When the matter began to be discussed in Congress as the
body which alone could declare war, and later came before the Foreign
Relations Committee of the Senate on the proposal to ratify the Geneva
Treaty, there was not a dissenting voice in either house, nor was
there in the press through the country, so far as is known, a single
unfavorable comment. Clara Barton’s campaign of publicity had been a
little handful of corn upon the top of the mountains and the fruit
thereof shook like the Cedars of Lebanon. The whole Nation was suddenly
converted to faith in the Red Cross.

Foreign nations stood in amazement when they saw this change of
sentiment. They were unable to account for it, nor could any one else
explain it to them. After eighteen years of indifference and hostility
America came over to the banner of the Red Cross with whole-hearted
acceptance of its humane principles.

But still the question was asked why America need concern herself with
an organization for war, when she was never going to have another war.
The answer to this question contained one of the distinctive principles
of the American Red Cross as compared with the Red Cross in other
countries. In Europe, the Red Cross was organized solely for relief in
time of war. In America, it was organized to meet any great public need.

As yet, however, the Red Cross was proceeding without official
authority. The death of President Garfield delayed for several months
the official adherence of the United States to the Treaty of Geneva.
Meantime, the Red Cross was in existence, by advice of President
Garfield. It had, however, only a single local organization, but it
cherished national and international aims and hopes. Miss Barton
herself recorded the history of the organization:

 The National Red Cross of America was formed nearly a year before the
 accession to the treaty. This was done by the advice of President
 Garfield, in order to aid as far as possible the accession.
 “Accordingly a meeting was held in Washington, D.C., May 21, 1881,
 which resulted in the formation of an association to be known as the
 American National Association of the Red Cross.”

 Several years of previous illness on the part of its president had
 resulted in fixing her country home at Dansville, New York, the seat
 of the great Jackson and Austin Sanitarium and the acknowledged
 foundation of the hundreds of health institutions of that kind which
 bless the country to-day. The establishment of the National Red Cross
 in Washington had attracted the attention of persons outside, who,
 of course, knew very little of it; but among others, the people of
 Dansville, the home of the president, felt that if she were engaged
 in some public movement, they too might at least offer to aid.
 Accordingly, on her return to them in midsummer, they waited upon
 her with a request to that effect, which resulted in the formation
 of a society of the Red Cross, this being the first body in aid of
 the National Association formed in the United States. It is possible
 I cannot make that more clear than by giving an extract from their
 report of that date, which was as follows:

 In reply to your request, given through the secretary of your
 association, that we make report to you concerning the inauguration
 of our society, its subsequent proceedings and present condition, the
 committee has the honor to submit the following statement:

 Dansville, Livingston County, New York, being the country residence
 of Miss Clara Barton, president of the American Association of the
 Red Cross, its citizens, desirous of paying a compliment to her, and
 at the same time of doing an honor to themselves, conceived the idea
 of organizing in their town the first local society of the Red Cross
 in the United States. To this end, a general preliminary meeting was
 held in the Presbyterian Church, when the principles of the Treaty of
 Geneva and the nature of its societies were defined in a clear and
 practical manner by Miss Barton, who had been invited to address the
 meeting. Shortly after, on the twenty-second of August, 1881, a second
 meeting, for the purpose of organization, held in the Lutheran Church
 and presided over by the pastor, Rev. Dr. Strobel, was attended by the
 citizens generally, including nearly all the religious denominations
 of the town, with their respective pastors. The purpose of the meeting
 was explained by your president, a constitution was presented and very
 largely signed, and officers were elected.

 Thus we are able to announce that on the eighteenth anniversary of
 the Treaty of Geneva, in Switzerland, August 22, 1864, was formed the
 first local society of the Red Cross in the United States of America.

While the Red Cross hung, like the coffin of Mohammed, between heaven
and earth, a disastrous forest fire occurred in Michigan. Clara Barton
at once issued, in the name of the Red Cross, an appeal for help. The
first city to respond was Rochester, forty miles from Dansville, and
Syracuse followed. The money was placed in the hands of the County
Clerk of Livingston County, New York, who went at once to Michigan,
and distributed financial help under direction of Clara Barton. She
also went to Michigan, and took care of the distribution of food and
clothing.

Here, in Michigan, for the first time on American soil, the banner of
the Red Cross was displayed above the supply tent of Clara Barton. A
part of the report of that first effort follows:

 Before a month had passed, before a thought of practical application
 to business had arisen, we were forcibly and sadly taught again the
 old lesson that we need but to build the altar, God will Himself
 provide the sacrifice. If we did not hear the crackling of the
 flames, our skies grew murky and dark and our atmosphere bitter with
 the drifting smoke that rolled over from the blazing fields of our
 neighbors of Michigan, whose living thousands fled in terror, whose
 dying hundreds writhed in the embers, and whose dead blackened in
 the ashes of their hard-earned homes. Instantly we felt the help and
 strength of our organization, young and untried as it was. We were
 grateful that in this first ordeal your sympathetic president was with
 us. We were deeply grateful for your prompt call to action, given
 through her, which rallied us to our work. Our relief rooms were
 instantly secured and our white banner, with its bright scarlet cross,
 which has never been furled since that hour, was thrown to the breeze,
 telling to every looker-on what we were there to do, and pointing to
 every generous heart an outlet for its sympathy. We had not mistaken
 the spirit of our people; our scarce-opened doorway was filled with
 men, women, and children bearing their gifts of pity and love. Tables
 and shelves were piled, our working committee of ladies took every
 article under inspection, their faithful hands made all garments whole
 and strong; lastly, each article received the stamp of the society and
 of the Red Cross, and all were carefully and quickly consigned to the
 firm packing-cases awaiting them. Eight large boxes were shipped at
 first, others followed directly, and so continued until notified by
 the Relief Committee of Michigan that no more were needed.

Among the fruits of Clara Barton’s work in Michigan was the confidence
and friendship of Senator Omar D. Conger and of Mrs. Conger, who,
seeing the actual workings of the Red Cross, under direct control of
Clara Barton, became its enthusiastic supporters, and her fast friends.
The Michigan experience also exhibited to the Nation the value of such
an organization, and showed that a country which did not intend ever to
have another war might still find use for the Red Cross.

But still the treaty halted. No one was opposing it. Every known
influence was favorable to it. Its adoption and signature were the
merest formality. Clara Barton was at liberty to go on with her work
with the full approval of the President and his Cabinet, and wait for
the adoption of the treaty which was certain to follow.

It did follow; but before it was adopted the heart of Clara Barton was
well-nigh broken. She had learned the weariness and pain of working
alone; she was now to learn the keener sorrow which emerges when one
undertakes to work with others.

Clara Barton had succeeded; no one questioned her success. But the
treaty was not yet adopted.




CHAPTER X

THE PERILS OF SUCCESS


Few people now remember that Clara Barton’s success encountered any
difficulties at this point in her career. Her published writings
make no reference to them. Her book on the Red Cross tells the story
as though events proceeded automatically through this period of
transition. President Garfield became interested and referred the
matter to Secretary Blaine, who became heartily enthusiastic, and he
and President Garfield told her to proceed with assurance that the
United States would approve the treaty. She did so, and, although
President Garfield was shot, his successor made the promise good, and
the Senate unanimously concurred. That would seem to have been the
whole story. But, as a matter of fact the months that followed the
published approval of Secretary Blaine and President Garfield, and
the formal approval of the treaty, were among the most anxious and
sorrowful of Clara Barton’s whole life.

The nation-wide publicity which now was freely accorded the movement
introduced Clara Barton to a new form of difficulty. She was well
schooled in the discipline of disappointment and deferred hope. Now she
came to know of the embarrassments of success. Swiftly after the Red
Cross came to recognition there rose competing organizations, seeking
to capitalize her success. The first day of August, 1881, saw the issue
of Volume I, Number 1, of “The Red Cross.” It was a monthly magazine,
of which there may have been no subsequent issues, the official
organ of a society known as the Red Cross. It copied Clara Barton’s
Associated Press article, and said:

 We must say it is rather late for Miss Barton, or any one else, to
 talk about organizing the Red Cross.

It then proceeded to tell that this organization had been in existence
since 1879:

 We did not attempt to make this a national affair, as we were not in
 condition to do so. This country was not going to war, at any time,
 and the promoters first considered the propriety of getting the order
 on a good foundation. ’Tis true, we have not undertaken any public
 work as yet, but it is a very great undertaking when the territory to
 be gone over is taken into consideration. We have organized a body of
 men that no country in Europe can excel for the purpose of carrying
 out our objects.

The real and original Red Cross was, therefore, according to this
journal, ready now to become national, and it warned Miss Clara Barton
that it had the right of way. It also published a portrait of the
real founder of the Red Cross, a gentleman born in England, who had
come to this country when young, and engaged in “several enterprises
which proved successful,” none of which were named; studied law, but
gave it up; studied medicine, but apparently did not practice. He was,
however, according to this journal, a very great and widely known man;
and his portrait showed him with so many badges and decorations upon
his right breast he would surely have had difficulty in drawing his
sword. He was the “Organizer and Supreme Commander.” A “Grand Promenade
Concert” was given in his honor in a very obscure hall in one of the
American cities, with a programme which the magazine printed in full,
consisting chiefly in a recitation (selected) by Miss Sadie Merryman;
a song (selected) by Miss Mary C. Andrews; a reading (selected) by
Miss Mary Prescott; a piano solo (selected) by Miss Mary C. Andrews; a
reading (selected) by Elmer E. Prescott, and selected songs with guitar
by the Misses Biederman and father. Besides these there was an “Address
of Welcome,” and a “Response” by the much-decorated “Organizer and
Supreme Commander.”

Clara Barton had a sense of humor. She could not only smile but laugh
heartily at competition of this bombastic character. She collected and
filed the literature, and it may be presumed that her files contain the
only preserved mementoes of this organization which served notice on
her that her Red Cross was an innovation.

But, nevertheless, this was a warning, and one which she had
occasion to heed. For immediately a considerable number of competing
organizations sprang up in several parts of the country, and some of
them gave her great anxiety.

She was not superstitious, and apparently did not notice that the
second Friday in January, 1882, fell on the 13th. But she recorded
that it was a bad Friday for her. Two days before, she had notice that
the wife of a United States Senator desired to call on her, and bring
one or two other ladies with her. She had moved into her new quarters
that very week, and not all her household goods were in place; so she
hastened to put up her curtains and finish her unpacking; for it had
rained on Monday when she expected to move, and her plans had been
disarranged.

Friday afternoon the wife of the Senator came, and with her another
lady.

 She said she had come partly on business; that she had some months
 before joined a society called the “Ladies’ National Red Star
 Association”;[2] that this society had a meeting this week, and the
 question of a counter-society came up; that this counter-society was
 said to be called the Red Cross, and appeared to have been organized
 to step in and do the work which they were doing; and it was decided
 to adjourn the meeting for one week to inform themselves in relation
 to this Red Cross Society. What was it? What did it propose to do?
 What had it done? She said she learned near the close of the meeting
 that I was the head of that society, and she came to ask if it was
 true, and what did the Red Cross have to say for itself?

 I told her I believed I was the head of the Society of which she
 wished to learn.

 She asked what Bills we proposed to present to Congress; and I told
 her, None.

 Why, yes, she said, they told her at the meeting that I had something
 before Congress.

 I told her I had a treaty, which I had presented for four years.

 She wanted to know what work we had done, and I told her of our work
 in Michigan.

 She said she knew nothing about the Red Cross; had seen something
 about it, but thought it was some Catholic thing; where did we get our
 authority? Was it a national thing? Had I anything published about it?

 I had a little pamphlet of two leaves, four years old. I gave her one.
 She said she was sorry not to get the information she came after.
 She left, evidently disappointed. I was sorry, also. I have no idea
 whether she came officially or at her own option, openly or as a spy.

Whatever the motive of the wife of the Senator who came to Miss Barton,
the organization was one of which she had occasion to learn not a
little. It was one that sprang up on the heels of her first success,
and it crowded her hard before it was left behind and forgotten.

Clara Barton felt uneasy. The treaty was not yet ratified, and she knew
not how many wives of Senators were in this rival organization, pushed
by ambitious women and seeking Government approval. Not very much of
such competition at that stage of the affair would be necessary to kill
the treaty and the Red Cross. She went next day to see a man whose
judgment she felt she could trust. She did not find him in his office,
but on Sunday he called on her:

 He had no special advice; was very busy. So are they all. All are
 busy; and I am to go on with this alone, as I plainly see. I shall
 make up my mind to let them all go, and I must gird myself for the
 work and go on with it by myself. I do not believe any member of my
 Society will be of any help to me in this hard work. They are all too
 busy.

The next day she went to the trial of Guiteau, and heard the closing
pleas. She was recognized, and given a seat inside the rail, and
“treated with marked attention,” which gratified her. That afternoon
she went to see Senator Lapham, and asked him to take charge of the
treaty in the Senate, and he cheerfully consented. She told him frankly
that opposing organizations were already seeking recognition, but he
encouraged her. A day or two later she saw Senator Windom, of the
Foreign Relations Committee, on whose support she had counted; and he
seemed to her to have grown sad and distant, and she felt sure he had
been approached by those who were opposing her.

She found, too, that her return to Washington, with its late dinners,
was not good for her. She resolved to forego heavy dinners; to eat her
last hearty meal at three o’clock, and enjoy a big red apple before
going to bed. A big red apple was always a means of grace to Clara
Barton. On one of the most desolate of these nights, when she came home
late in the rain after a disappointing day, she gratefully records that
her apple was good.

She had cheering word about her finances. Her business affairs, left
in the hands of reliable New York bankers, had prospered during her
absence abroad. She had used while in Europe considerably less than
her income; her principal had swelled somewhat, and her annual income
was more by quite a little than she had expected. About the middle
of January she received her complete account, and found that she had
more money than she thought; and this was a comfort. Her expenses at
Dansville, though much increased by her hospitality, had kept well
within her annual receipts, and she was safely provided for for life.
She need never worry so far as money was concerned.

But she was worried. She began to question whether her dream of an
American Red Cross would ever come true. It was bitter hard to have
it fail after she had won over three Presidents, Hayes, Garfield,
and Arthur; but fail she thought it must, even after it had shown in
Michigan how useful it could be. She seriously thought of returning to
Europe, and letting some one else take up her thankless task. She wrote:

 I am so tired. I sleep very poorly. I can only think of some good
 way of getting out of this country. I feel as if I should be willing
 to let all go, if only I could get out, and hear no more strife and
 bickering lies. Why should I let my life be spoiled by those who are
 now opposing me, and who take the joy out of my sunshine?

Why, indeed? She had money enough to live upon, in Dansville, or in
Oxford, or for that matter in Washington; and she owned homes in each
of those three places, and had income enough to live upon in any one of
them or in Europe. Why should she expose herself longer to weariness,
misrepresentation, and cruel disappointment?

It will be seen that Clara Barton had some reason to apprehend trouble
growing out of the visit of the wife of the Senator. Powerful backing
had already been secured for the first of the opposing organizations
that gave her pain and sorrow.

But she prevailed, and the Senate at length ratified the treaty without
a dissenting vote. Either the Senator’s wife was more favorably
impressed than Clara Barton thought, or her husband refused to be
guided by her opposition.

But the opponents of Clara Barton were active to the very hour when the
treaty was ratified, and there were days when it seemed that she was
working at a hopeless task. She went to see influential people, only to
find them out or occupied or indifferent or strangely uncommunicative.
She was almost in despair.

There came a day, Monday, February 6, 1882, when her own feelings
changed:

 It did not seem like other days. There was either much to do or
 nothing to do. I knelt at my bedside, and asked earnestly, tearfully,
 for guidance. I only want to know my way. I feel that I can walk it,
 if I can be made to see it. I am so weary of all this strife, this
 unrest, this doubt. I am willing to let the work go into other hands.
 If all goes as hoped, I can call an executive committee meeting,
 announce the ratification of the treaty, hand in my resignation, and
 get out of it all. If they want the Society, they can keep it; if not,
 it will die if let alone and some other can be organized, or they
 can take the one that is now opposing me. Then I can go and rest. It
 has been my part to do the work of the treaty. I have tried to do it
 faithfully, and it has met with little moral support, even from my own
 committee. I will try with God’s help to go on faithfully to the end,
 with no support but His; and if He will give it, when this is done,
 I shall be ready to lay the burden down, even if my enemies gain the
 advantage of it. This has been a day of instruction and discipline,
 and, I dare hope, not lost.

She went to the State Department. Mr. Adee reassured her. He did not
think there would be any trouble about the treaty, or that she need
fear the opposition.

She had notice of the committee meeting, and she went to the Senate.
She was misdirected, and went to one or two wrong rooms, but finally
found the Committee on Foreign Relations, with Senator Windom in
the chair. He greeted her cordially, which surprised her after his
recent apparent coldness and evasiveness. He introduced her to Senator
Edmunds, but that Senator insisted upon greeting her as an old friend.
They heard her with sympathy; took her little four-year-old two-leaved
tract, and spoke no word about the opposition.

A few days later Senator Lapham called and told her things were not
going as well as he had hoped. Senator Windom, he said, was favorable,
but troubled. The matter seemed hung up at the State Department.

She told him she would go to the State Department herself and see what
was the trouble.

“His good kind heart was touched, and his eyes were full.”

He did not know any other way than for her to do this. And so she went.

She was admitted immediately to the Department of State, and told
confidentially that it was all right. The Secretary of State had
conferred with the President, and they were all ready to recommend the
treaty to the Senate.

Would she like to see the treaty?

Would she? Indeed, she would!

It must be a secret; unsigned documents were not supposed to be shown;
but the Secretary of State would be pleased to know whether this treaty
was exactly what she wanted.

She had never seen a treaty, and did not know what it looked like. It
was a volume, a kind of unbound book, of soft parchment, something like
fourteen inches square. She sat down and read it, word for word, the
Secretary of State watching her intermittently as he busied himself
about other matters. Line by line the full significance of it came
over her. It quoted in full the text of the 1864 Convention, and
recited in effect the whole situation into which this would bring the
United States in its relation to other nations. It was a great and
solemn document, such as she had never before handled; and her life
and hope were bound up in it. At the very end were the formal words of
ratification, with blank spaces for the signature of the President and
Secretary of State, and a place for the big seal of the United States
of America.

 I had kept my eyes clear enough to read to the very end; but then I
 could hold up no longer, and how long a cry I indulged in, I do not
 know. But I know that it rested me; and after a while he stepped over
 and asked, very gently, “How does it suit you?” I told him it was
 all I could have hoped for, but I was ashamed to have done so badly
 myself. He, laughing, said that was all right. I asked him when it
 would be signed, and he said, “Any time, now.”

 At last it was done!

Why had she worried so much about it?

She worried because she knew there was reason to worry; and because
there were so few to worry; and because she did not know whether her
worrying would do any good.

For it is necessary to tell a little, a very little, about why she
worried.

There lie before me as I write certain letters written to Clara Barton
by a woman who came to her in the latter part of her struggle to secure
the recognition of the Red Cross, and who wrote to Miss Barton that to
be associated with her in such work would be the crowning glory of her
life:

 I should think it a greater glory to be a doorkeeper in such a society
 as the Red Cross than to be--well, Mrs. President of the United
 States. If in the humblest way I can help you, I am at your service.
 There may be nothing for me to do, but if there is, command me.

Sadly, in after years, Clara Barton gathered up these and other
documents, arranged them neatly in order, and endorsed them:

 The enclosed papers will serve to show in part what the Red Cross had
 to meet in its incipiency before we had the treaty. This woman had
 been our secretary and trusted friend, but by some means became a
 strong competitor, and organized an opposing society.

That is all she said about it; no word of bitterness or of
self-justification. But this was not the only woman who rushed to her
when she first gained publicity, proclaimed that she would be a servant
of the servants of Clara Barton, learned all her confidential affairs,
and then betrayed her.

This volume will make no catalogue of those who ate of her bread and
accepted her confidences and who proved base and ungrateful. This
particular woman is mentioned because it seemed to Clara Barton that
she might very possibly defeat all that Clara Barton was working for.
She gained friends in high places, and she knew just whom Clara Barton
counted to be her friends, and how to approach some of them.

There lie before the author, also, certain anonymous letters, received
at this time, some of them written in one city and sent to other cities
to be mailed. There were also some vicious newspaper articles, one of
them first published in a remote Southern city, and later copied into
Washington and Philadelphia papers, and these Clara Barton clipped,
and labeled with the name of the person who, without any question, she
believed to be their author. These and the anonymous letters and the
letters of affection are all in the same package. Clara Barton arranged
them, and she thought she knew.

Now, on the day that Clara Barton visited the office of the Secretary
of State, she was so overjoyed that she went straight to the White
House to thank the President. Mr. Arthur was not in, but her little
note was accepted by his secretary, who smiled and assured her that he
understood, and that the President would be glad to receive it. And she
went home with a happy heart. And Senator Lapham sent her a big bouquet
of roses that night.

The next Monday was the day set for Mr. Blaine to deliver the memorial
address on President Garfield, and she had a seat in the gallery of the
House of Representatives; which was a much-coveted honor. She rose in
full expectation of going; and she went.

But at breakfast she received her mail; and there was a letter from her
rival:

 It was the most abusive of all I have ever received from her. She
 charged me with all little meannesses, and warned me if I do not stop
 people’s tongues, she will take redress upon me, either through the
 press or by law.

 It had the effect to stun or daze me until I did not want to go to the
 Address. But I did go.

That was one of the things that was oppressing Clara Barton in those
days. That was why she was troubled when the wife of a Senator came
to see her and ask whether there was such a thing as the Red Cross,
and what it was, and why it was opposing another organization of which
the Senator’s wife was a member. That was why she was worried when the
Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations grew strangely distant.

But she went to hear Mr. Blaine, and she met prominent people, some of
whom knew her.

Two days later she had confidential tidings that the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee had _unanimously_ approved the treaty, and that it
would doubtless be discussed in executive session of the Senate on the
following Tuesday.

But it hung on for another month, a month through which it was hard for
her to go, but through which she went bravely.

On Thursday, March 16, she felt as though hope was almost hopeless.
She “had no heart to speak” that day; “had more tears than words.” “It
has been a sad day.”

She wrote these words that evening, “weary and heart-sick”; but at this
point was interrupted by a note from Senator Lapham. The note will bear
printing:

  U.S. SENATE CHAMBER
  WASHINGTON, March 16, 1882

  MISS BARTON:

 I have the gratifying privilege of informing you of the ratification
 by the Senate of the Geneva Convention; of the full assent of the
 United States to the same, by the action of the Senate this afternoon.
 I had the injunction of secrecy removed so that it could be published
 at once. The whole is in print, and if I get time I will send you some
 copies in the morning. I go home to-morrow to be gone a week.

 LAUS DEO!

  Very truly

  E. S. LAPHAM


It ought to have brought her joy; but she wrote:

 I had waited so long, and was so weak and broken, I could not even
 feel glad. I laid down the letter, and wiped my tired eyes.

Before she got to bed she had another sad tale to hear, of dissensions
among those who should have been rejoicing with her, but were
displeased. And she went to bed ill.

Many of the people who from this time came to Clara Barton with an
earnest desire to be permitted to share in her labor were thoroughly
and permanently loyal, and some of them are to this day among the
foremost of those who hold her name in reverence. There were others,
however, not less sincere, who were an embarrassment to her, coming in
some cases with a maximum of enthusiasm and a minimum of discretion.
There were still others who, after working with her long enough
to gain her confidence, became fired with an ambition to organize
societies of their own. There was a Blue Anchor Society, now entirely
forgotten, but which caused her a great deal of anxiety. It was
established by a woman whom she counted a sincere friend, who learned
about the Red Cross from Clara Barton and utilized her knowledge in the
formation of a rival society which at one time threatened to be more
prominent in high places than the Red Cross itself. Later there was
organized a White Cross Society, which gained such recognition that, in
one of the Dewey parades at the end of the Spanish War, it was placed
ahead of the Red Cross. It had powerful friends, and the bill for its
recognition by Congress passed the Senate, but did not pass the House.

These rival organizations appear very puerile and futile now, but
at the time they were a source of great anxiety to Clara Barton. It
sometimes seemed to her that there were not many people whom she could
trust to maintain permanently high and unselfish motives like her own.
If she failed, as she was charged with failing, to share responsibility
with her associates, that failure had behind it some very unhappy
experiences that need not here be recorded.

Just at the point when her success, as we now view it, was practically
assured, she went one Saturday to call on an influential woman whose
friendship she had won in the work for the sufferers from the Michigan
fires. Her heart sank within her when she found on this friend’s desk
the literature of an opposing organization with an invitation to join.
She wondered if this friend too would desert her, and she went home
greatly depressed. So far as that friend was concerned, her fears
were groundless. This woman and her husband had seen her work and
they remained loyal to her through life. The next day was a family
anniversary, and it set her to remembering her childhood. She wrote in
her diary that day:

 I wish I had always remained a little girl. I did not begin like
 other children; did not learn how to be a child, still less how to be
 a young girl and woman; and so had no knowledge of the right way to
 get on in society. I have made only mistakes, and have always been
 so sensitive that I could not bear the consequences of my mistakes.
 The longer I live the worse it gets, until now the menacing spirits
 hover about my poor beset pathway, darkening it with the shadows
 of approaching night; there is not a ray of brightness nor even of
 safety; they wait like robbers to see me far enough along to set upon
 me and slay me outright. But there is no way but to go on; I cannot
 hide. I wonder if it would not have been better if I had gone, the
 little five-year-old girl that was snatched from death? I often revert
 to that sharp illness, which I can remember, as the time when perhaps
 it would have been better if no remedy had been found. What years of
 unrest, pain to myself and to others it would have wiped out, and all
 the world would have been as well if not better! Looking at it as
 calmly as I am able and with my best judgment, I can only see failure
 of it all. There have been no successes in my life, only attempts at
 success and no realization.

At such times she felt her lack of experience in social matters. The
women who organized these opposing societies were able to hold parlor
meetings in aristocratic homes; to organize committees with long lists
of names of society women as patronesses; to secure publicity, and to
enlist strong political influence. She wrote in her diary:

 I am very low-spirited. I am cold, alone, surrounded by harmful
 spirits. All the society people of the city and country seem to be
 arrayed in arms against me, with only my single hand, sore heart, and
 silent tongue to make my way against misrepresentation, malice, and
 selfish ambition.

These were some of the reasons why Clara Barton was not jubilant when
her success finally came. She was too tired, too heart-sore to care
very much. She was weary of Washington, and she thought she was ready
now to go to one of her other homes and live the rest of her life
in peace. The Red Cross was now an established fact; the treaty was
signed and ratified. She had only to hand in her resignation and leave
the work to be carried on by others; whether they were her enemies or
friends, she did not greatly care, her part was done.

That was what she said in her diary, but a few days later the meeting
occurred for the perfecting of the organization in its new and
accredited character. She went to the meeting only partially recovered
from her depression, but she returned in high spirits. “This has
been a red-letter day for me,” she wrote; “the meeting was largely
attended.” Quite a number of prominent people seemed eager to sign the
constitution and become members of her organization. The cry from the
flooded district along the Mississippi was loud and strong; there was
work to be done immediately; it was no time for Clara Barton to resign.
She wrote no more of the cruel things which she had been suffering, but
went straight forward in her work of relief. It was many years before
she had time to think again of resigning.

On the first day of March, 1882, the President, by his signature, gave
the accession of the United States to the Treaty of Geneva of August
22, 1864, and also to that of October 20, 1868, and transmitted to the
Senate the following message, declaration, and proposed adoption of
the same:

 Message from the President of the United States, transmitting an
 accession of the United States to the Convention concluded at
 Geneva on the twenty-second August, 1864, between various powers,
 for the amelioration of the wounded of armies in the field, and to
 the additional articles thereto, signed at Geneva on the twentieth
 October, 1868.

 March 3, 1882.--Read; accession read the first time referred to the
 Committee on Foreign Relations, and, together with the message,
 ordered to be printed in confidence, for the use of the Senate.

 March 16, 1882.--Ratified and injunction of secrecy removed therefrom.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate for its action thereon, the accession
of the United States to the convention concluded at Geneva on
the twenty-second August, 1864, between various powers, for the
amelioration of the wounded of armies in the field, and to the
additional articles thereto, signed at Geneva on the twentieth of
October, 1868.

  CHESTER A. ARTHUR

  WASHINGTON, March 3, 1882

WHEREAS, on the twenty-second day of August, 1864, a convention was
concluded at Geneva, in Switzerland, between the Grand Duchy of Baden
and the Swiss Confederation, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of
Denmark, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Empire, the Grand Duchy
of Hesse, the Kingdom of Italy, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the
Kingdom of Portugal, the Kingdom of Prussia, and the Kingdom of
Würtemberg, for the amelioration of the wounded in armies in the field,
the tenor of which convention is as follows!

[Here followed the treaty and additional articles.]

Now, therefore, the President of the United States of America, by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate, hereby declares that
the United States accede to the said convention of the twenty-second
August, 1864, and also accede to the said convention of October 20,
1868.

Done at Washington this first day of March in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and eighty-two, and of the Independence of the
United States the one hundred and sixth.

(Seal) CHESTER A. ARTHUR By the President: FRED’K T. FRELINGHUYSEN
Secretary of State

When the Senate finally took favorable action and President Arthur
added his signature, Clara Barton did not wait for mail, but cabled the
joyful news to Geneva, and received in reply the following official
letter:

  GENEVA, _March 24, 1882_

  MISS CLARA BARTON

  _President of the American Society of the Red Cross_

 MADEMOISELLE: At last, on the 17th instant, I received your glorious
 telegram. I delayed replying to it in order to communicate its
 contents to my colleagues of the International Committee, so as to
 be able to thank you in the name of all of us and to tell you of
 the joy it gives us. You must feel happy, too, and proud to have at
 last attained your object, thanks to a perseverance and a zeal which
 surmounted every obstacle.

 Please, if opportunity offers, to be our interpreter with President
 Arthur and present him our warmest congratulations.

 I suppose your Government will now notify the Swiss Federal Council of
 its decision in the matter, and the latter will then inform the other
 Powers which have signed the Red Cross Treaty.

 Only after this formality shall have been complied with can we occupy
 ourselves with fixing the official international status of your
 society. We have, however, already considered the circular which we
 intend to address to all the societies of the Red Cross, and with
 regard thereto we have found that it will be necessary for us as a
 preliminary measure to be furnished with a document certifying that
 your society has attained the second of its objects, i.e., that it has
 been (officially) recognized by the American Government.

 It is important that we be able to certify that your Government is
 prepared to accept your services in case of war; that it will readily
 enter into cooperation with you and will encourage the centralization
 under _your direction_ of all the voluntary aid. We have no doubt that
 you will readily obtain from the competent authorities an official
 declaration to that effect, and we believe that this matter will be
 merely a formality, but we attach the greatest importance to the
 fact in order to cover our responsibility, especially in view of the
 pretensions of rival societies which might _claim_ to be acknowledged
 by us.

 It is your society alone and none other that we will patronize,
 because it inspires us with confidence and we would be placed in a
 false position if you failed to obtain for it a privileged position by
 a formal recognizance of the Government.

 We hope that you will appreciate the motives of caution which guide us
 in this matter, and that you may soon enable us to act in the premises.

 Wishing to testify to you its gratitude for the services you have
 already rendered to the Red Cross, the committee decided to offer to
 you one of the medals which a German engraver caused to be struck off
 in 1870 in honor of the Red Cross. It will be sent to you in a few
 days. It is of very small intrinsic value indeed, but such as it is,
 we have no other means of recompensing the most meritorious of our
 assistants. Please to regard it only as a simple memorial, and as a
 proof of the esteem and gratitude we feel for you.

 Accept, Mademoiselle, the assurance of my most distinguished
 sentiments,

  G. MOYNIER

  President


On the 26th of July, 1882, the following proclamation was issued by the
President:

 _By the President of the United States of America_:

 A PROCLAMATION

 Whereas, on the 22d day of August, 1864, a convention was concluded
 at Geneva, in Switzerland, between the Grand Duchy of Baden and the
 Swiss Confederation, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark,
 the Kingdom of Spain, the French Empire, the Grand Duchy of Hesse,
 the Kingdom of Italy, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of
 Portugal, the Kingdom of Prussia, and the Kingdom of Würtemberg, for
 the amelioration of the wounded in armies in the field, the tenor of
 which convention is hereinafter subjoined;

 And whereas the several contracting parties to the said Convention
 exchanged the ratifications thereof at Geneva on the 22d day of June,
 1865;

 And whereas the several states hereinafter named have adhered to the
 said Convention in virtue of Article IX thereof to wit:

  Sweden                December 13, 1864.
  Greece                January 5-17, 1865.
  Great Britain         February 18, 1865.
  Mecklenburg-Schwerin  March 9, 1865.
  Turkey                July 5, 1865.
  Würtemberg            June 2, 1866.
  Hesse                 June 22, 1866.
  Bavaria               June 30, 1866.
  Austria               July 21, 1866.
  Persia                December 5, 1874.
  Salvador              December 30, 1874.
  Montenegro            November 17-29, 1875.
  Servia                March 24, 1876.
  Bolivia               October 16, 1879.
  Chili                 November 15, 1879.
  Argentine Republic    November 25, 1879.
  Peru                  April 22, 1880.

 And whereas the Swiss Confederation, in virtue of the said Article IX
 of said Convention, has invited the United States of America to accede
 thereto;

 And whereas on the 20th October, 1868, the following additional
 articles were proposed and signed at Geneva, on behalf of Great
 Britain, Austria, Baden, Bavaria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy,
 Netherlands, North Germany, Sweden and Norway, Switzerland, Turkey,
 and Würtemberg, the tenor of which additional articles is hereinafter
 subjoined;

 And whereas the President of the United States of America, by and with
 the advice and consent of the Senate, did, on the first day of March,
 one thousand eight hundred and eighty-two, declare that the United
 States accede to the said Convention of the 22d of August, 1864, and
 also accede to the said Convention of October 20, 1868;

 And whereas, on the ninth day of June, one thousand eight hundred and
 eighty-two, the Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation, in virtue
 of the final provision of a certain minute of the exchange of the
 ratifications of the said Convention at Berne, December 22, 1864, did,
 by a formal declaration, accept the said adhesion of the United States
 of America, as well in the name of the Swiss Confederation as in that
 of the other contracting states;

 And whereas, furthermore, the Government of the Swiss Confederation
 has informed the Government of the United States that the exchange
 of the ratifications of the aforesaid additional articles of the 22d
 October, 1868, to which the United States of America have, in like
 manner, adhered as aforesaid, has not yet taken place between the
 contracting parties, and that these articles cannot be regarded as a
 treaty in full force and effect:

 Now, therefore, be it known that I, Chester A. Arthur, President of
 the United States of America, have caused the said Convention of
 August 22, 1864, to be made public, to the end that the same and
 every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with
 good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof; reserving,
 however, the promulgation of the hereinbefore mentioned additional
 articles of October 20, 1868, notwithstanding the accession of
 the United States of America thereto, until the exchange of the
 ratifications thereof between the several contracting states shall
 have been effected, and the said additional articles shall have
 acquired full force and effect as an international treaty.

 In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the seal of
 the United States to be affixed.

 Done at the city of Washington, this twenty-sixth day of July, in the
 year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eighty-two, and of the
 Independence of the United States the one hundred and seventh.

  [L.S.]

  CHESTER A. ARTHUR

  By the President:

  FRED’K T. FRELINGHUYSEN
  _Secretary of State_

 United States of America, Department of State, to all to whom these
 presents shall come, greeting:

 I certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the original on file in
 the Department of State.

 In testimony whereof I, John Davis, Acting Secretary of State of the
 United States, have hereunto subscribed my name and caused the seal of
 the Department of State to be affixed.

 Done at the city of Washington, this 9th day of August, a.d. 1882, and
 of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred
 and seventh.

  [L.S.]

  JOHN DAVIS


Thus was the American Association of the Red Cross welcomed into the
fellowship of kindred associations in thirty-one other nations, the
most prosperous and civilized on the globe, its position assured, and
its future course made simple, direct, and untroubled.

The Official Bulletin of the International Committee also hailed
the accession of the United States to the treaty in an article of
characteristic caution, and of great significance. In that article the
distinction was carefully pointed out between that which had already
been fully agreed to, and had become invested with all the force and
solemnity of international treaties, and the proposed treaty, which
had been drawn up and considered with a view to ultimate adoption.
This proposed treaty had received the sanction and signature of the
International Committee at Geneva without ever having been formally
adopted by any nation. The United States had, at the same moment,
adopted both, thus becoming the thirty-second nation to adhere to the
treaty of August 22, 1864, and the _first_ to adopt that of October 20,
1868.[3] We quote the entire article:


 ÉTATS-UNIS

 ADHÉSION DES ÉTATS-UNIS A LA CONVENTION DE GENÈVE

 Nous référant à l’article inséré dans notre précédent Bulletin, nous
 sommes heureux de pouvoir annoncer que l’acte d’adhésion, que nous
 pressentions, a été signé à Washington le 16 mars, à la suite d’un
 vote par lequel les membres du Sénat l’ont approuvé à l’unanimité. Nos
 lecteurs seront sans doute surpris, comme nous, qu’après la longue
 et systématique résistance du gouvernement des États-Unis pour se
 rallier à la Convention de Genève, il ne se soit pas trouvé dans la
 législature américaine, lorsque la question a été portée devant elle,
 un seul représentant de l’opposition. Un revirement d’opinion aussi
 complet ne peut s’expliquer, que si l’on admet que les chefs de la
 nation avaient nourri jusqu’à présent des préjugés à l’égard de la
 Convention de Genève, préjugés qui se sont évanouis le jour où ils ont
 bien compris ce que l’on attendait d’eux, et reconnu qu’il n’y avait
 là rien de compremettant pour la politique de leur pays.

 Dans leur zèle de néophytes, ils ont même dépassé le but, car ils ont
 voté leur adhésion, non-seulement à la convention du 22 août 1864,
 mais encore au _projet_ d’articles additionnels du 20 octobre 1868,
 qui n’était pas en cause puisqu’il n’a jamais eu force de loi. Nous ne
 donnons du moins cette nouvelle que sous toute réserve, car nous avons
 reçu à son sujet des renseignements contradictoires. Si ce vice de
 forme se trouve dans la pièce officielle qui sera envoyée au Conseil
 Fédéral Suisse, on peut craindre qu’il ne retarde la conclusion tant
 désirée de cette importante affaire, mais il ne faudra pas trop le
 regretter, puisqu’il aura permis de connaître l’opinion de la grande
 république transatlantique, sur les questions maritimes relatives à la
 Croix rouge.

[Translation]

 UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL BULLETIN FOR APRIL--

 No. 50, p. 92

 ADHESION OF THE UNITED STATES TO THE CONVENTION OF GENEVA

 Referring to the article inserted in our preceding Bulletin, p. 42,
 we are happy to be able to announce that the act of adhesion which we
 presented was signed at Washington the 16th of March, in pursuance of
 a vote by which the members of the Senate gave their approval with
 unanimity. Our readers will doubtless be surprised, as we are, that
 after the long and systematic resistance of the Government of the
 United States against rallying to the Convention of Geneva, there
 cannot be found in the American legislature a single representative of
 the opposition. So complete a reversal of opinion cannot be explained,
 unless we admit that the chief officers of the nation had cherished,
 up to the present time, prejudices in regard to the Convention of
 Geneva--prejudices which vanished as soon as they fully comprehended
 what was expected of them, and recognized that there was nothing
 compromising in it to the political condition of their country.

 With the zeal of new converts, they have even gone beyond the mark,
 inasmuch as they have voted their adhesion not only to the convention
 of the 22d of August, 1864, but also to the plan of Additional
 Articles of the 20th of October, 1868, which was not the matter in
 question, since that had never had the force of law; we give this
 news only under every reserve, because we have received contradictory
 information on the subject. If this defect in form is found in the
 official document which will be sent to the Swiss Federal Council one
 could fear it might retard the so much desired conclusion of this
 important affair, but it need not be too much regretted, since it
 will enable us to understand the opinion of the great Transatlantic
 Republic upon maritime questions as they relate to the Red Cross.

We have seen how the final vote of the Senate, approving the treaty,
found Clara Barton too weary and too ill to feel at the moment any
thrill of joy in her success. The strength of will that held her to the
end of these struggles was not born of sustained enthusiasm; it was the
tenacity of a courage that had grown very weary, but that never gave
up. It was not the joy of success that called her back to interest in
life, but the stern call of duty. While the Senate was considering the
treaty, the Mississippi River was rising higher and higher. That was
her call back to life and labor.

The work done in Michigan had served widely to advertise the Red Cross,
and it made way for a wider appeal. The first funds distributed by it
were collected locally, in the two cities nearest to the summer home of
Miss Barton.

The disastrous Mississippi flood occurred in the spring of 1882. Clara
Barton at once called together her advisers and laid her plans for
relief. It seemed to them wise that public appeal should be delayed
until the Senate, then considering the treaty, should have taken
favorable action; lest precipitate effort for temporary relief might
prejudice the success of the greater end that now was almost in sight.
But the preparations for relief were made, even though the public
appeal was, for good reason, a little delayed. Indeed, before there was
any official recognition, the Red Cross had its agents on the ground,
effecting local organizations that became permanent. Of this Clara
Barton wrote:

 Again our infant organization sent its field agent, Dr. Hubbell, to
 the scene of disaster, where millions of acres of the richest valley,
 cotton, and sugar lands of America, and thousands upon thousands of
 homes were under the waters of the mightiest of rivers--where the
 swift rising floods overtook alike man and beast in their flight
 of terror, sweeping them ruthlessly to the gulf beyond, or leaving
 them clinging in famishing despair to some trembling roof or swaying
 tree-top till relief could reach and rescue them.

 The National Association, with no general fund, sent of its personal
 resources what it was able to do, and so acceptable did these prove
 and so convincing were the beneficences of the work that the cities of
 Memphis, Vicksburg, and New Orleans desired to be permitted to form
 associate societies and work under the National Association. This was
 permitted, and those societies have remained until the present time,
 New Orleans organizing for the entire State of Louisiana. The city of
 Rochester, proud and grateful of its success in the disaster a few
 months before, again came to the front and again rendered excellent
 service.

A few days were required to complete the official recognition. Then the
American Red Cross issued its first national appeal to the American
people, a copy of which appeal is still preserved:

 APPEAL TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE

 The President having signed the Treaty of the Geneva Conference, and
 the Senate having, on the 16th instant, ratified the President’s
 action, the American Association of the Red Cross, organized under
 provisions of said treaty, purposes to send its agents at once among
 the sufferers by the recent floods, with a view to the ameliorating of
 their condition so far as can be done by human aid and the means at
 hand will permit.

 Contributions are urgently solicited. Remittances in money may be
 made to Hon. Charles J. Folger, Secretary of the Treasury, chairman
 of the board of trustees, or to his associates, Hon. Robert T.
 Lincoln, Secretary of War, and Hon. George B. Loring, Commissioner of
 Agriculture. Contributions of wearing apparel, bedding, and provisions
 should be addressed to “The Red Cross Agent,” at Memphis, Tenn.,
 Vicksburg, Miss., and Helena, Ark.

  CLARA BARTON
  J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS
  FREDERICK DOUGLASS
  ALEX. Y. P. GARNETT
  MRS. OMAR D. CONGER
  A. S. SOLOMONS
  MRS. S. A. MARTHA CANFIELD
  R. D. MUSSEY

  _Committee_

  WASHINGTON, D.C., _March 23, 1882_


The response to this appeal was generous. The Red Cross immediately
effected its permanent organization; and during the next twenty years
it was seldom without a task of some kind.


FOOTNOTES:

[2] This is not precisely the name which this rival organization
assumed. There would appear to be no good reason for recording it;
but the fact that there were several such organizations which sprang
into being immediately after President Garfield’s recognition of Clara
Barton should not be forgotten.

[3] Of this proposed treaty of October 20, 1868, the 9th article was as
follows:

ART. IX. The military hospital ships remain under martial law in all
that concerns their stores; they become the property of the captor, but
the latter must not divert them from their special appropriation during
the continuance of the war.

[_The vessels not equipped for fighting, which, during peace, the
Government shall have officially declared to be intended to serve as
floating hospital ships, shall, however, enjoy during the war complete
neutrality, both as regards stores, and also as regards their staff,
provided their equipment is exclusively appropriated to the special
service on which they are employed._]

In the published English text, from which this version of the
Additional Articles is taken, the paragraph thus marked in brackets
appears in continuation of Article IX. It is not, however, found in the
original French text adopted by the Geneva conference, October 20, 1868.

By an instruction sent to the United States minister at Berne, January
20, 1883, the right is reserved to omit this paragraph from the English
text, and to make any other necessary corrections, if at any time
hereafter the Additional Articles shall be completed by the exchange
of the ratifications hereof between the several signatory and adhering
powers.




CHAPTER XI

CLARA BARTON AT SHERBORN


It will be well at this point to make plain three points which were not
clearly understood at the outset, and have sometimes been misunderstood
since.

The first is that Clara Barton, in establishing the Red Cross in
America, was not seeking primarily to provide a place for herself. At
this period she had three homes, and money enough to support herself
comfortably in any one of them. We have an interesting look into the
Dansville home in a letter of her brother David to his daughter, Ida
Barton Riccius. He was ill, and she, not yet recovered from her own
illness, took him in and nursed him back to health. He wrote:

  DANSVILLE, June 13, 1880

 Clara’s friends met us at the cars and rendered all necessary
 assistance. I was very weak and tired.

 Clara lives in a very splendid old mansion, in a location unsurpassed,
 and a grand view of all the surroundings. Her house is filled with
 almost everything that adds to health, comfort, and happiness. Clara
 is very attentive to me. I think it came rather hard on her the first
 part of the time. Perhaps she will stand it a little better now that I
 am better and can possibly assist her a little. I have been gradually
 gaining since I arrived, considering how miserable I was when I came.

 The living here agrees with me exceedingly well. We have plenty of
 good fresh milk, fresh graham bread from the bakery, fresh graham meal
 to make puddings, butter, cheese, apple-sauce, any kind of canned
 fruit we choose, which generally constitutes our breakfast. For dinner
 we have meat, fish, beans, potatoes, and things of that kind. For
 supper we have bread, butter, tea or coffee, cheese, and fruit of any
 kind. This is the way we live and I enjoy it much. Clara has nearly
 all sorts of canned fruit in abundance, but what is best of all is
 plenty of nice fresh apples which I go into without mercy.

Clara Barton would have smiled a little at her brother’s arrangement of
her menus. She probably would have said that she had a simple breakfast
of graham bread, fresh butter, and fruit; a hearty midday meal of meat
or fish and vegetables; and a light supper of bread, butter, cheese,
and fruit, with abundance of sweet milk and an unlimited supply of good
red apples.

This was the kind of home which Clara Barton left when she went to
Washington to plead for the Red Cross. She often longed for it, and
thought of going back there. Yet the purpose which had taken her to
Dansville had been accomplished in her restored health. There was no
important work for her to do there, or at Oxford. She could have a roof
and red apples in either place, but she wanted to be promoting what had
become the great object in life for her. That was what brought her back
to Washington.

If, in all the weary months when she was fighting her lonely battles
for the Red Cross, it ever occurred to her that this organization
would give to her a life position, or bring to her either money or
other emoluments, there is no hint of it in her diaries. So far as one
may judge from these intimate self-revelations, her purpose was as
genuinely altruistic as human nature is capable of becoming.

Nor is there any indication that she supposed that this would bring
her additional honor. She already had more honors of certain desirable
kinds than any other woman in America. Her Civil War record was known
throughout the Nation. The lecture platform offered her an inviting and
remunerative invitation to return if she cared to take it up. She had
brought back with her from Europe official decorations such as royalty
neither before nor since has ever bestowed upon an American woman.

Secretary Blaine inquired about these with interest one day, and a few
days later she handed three of them to his secretary with the following
letter:

  WASHINGTON, D.C., Oct. 31, 1881

  To the Hon. Secretary of State
  Washington, D.C.

  DEAR MR. BLAINE:

 After the words unintentionally dropped at the interview so kindly
 granted me on Saturday, it occurs to me that it is perhaps the
 suitable thing for me to do, possibly a duty, to explain to you,
 as the Head of our foreign relations, my own connection in that
 direction. I will with your kind permission take the liberty to pass
 in, by the hand of your secretary, the accompanying “Decorations”:

 The “Iron Cross of Merit” issued to me in 1872 by the Emperor and
 Empress of Germany on the occasion of the seventy-fifth birthday of
 the Emperor.

 The “Gold Cross of Remembrance” presented to me by the Grand Duke and
 Grand Duchess of Baden at the close of the Franco-German War.

 The “Red Cross of Geneva,” brought to Strassburg and placed upon my
 neck by the Grand Duchess of Baden, near whose court I suppose by
 courtesy I in a manner belong, as the winter of 1872 was passed there,
 and I left with the faithful promise to return to Europe once in
 two years, and pass each alternate winter with her, a promise which
 circumstances alone have prevented me from keeping,--the first four
 years after my return to America in 1873 were passed as a broken-down
 invalid, mainly confined to my room or bed. The four last, since on
 my feet, I have been held here by my efforts, and my promise given
 repeatedly abroad, to plant the Red Cross on our own soil, and hang
 its peaceful humane flag beside our “Stars and Stripes.”

 I am glad, Mr. Secretary, that you have seen it, as you have in
 the late celebration, for you will be the better able, it may be,
 to comprehend and excuse my persistency. Except for this constant
 and exhaustive occupation, I should have passed either of the last
 winters at Carlsruhe; but it has been sufficient to consume my entire
 time, strength, and spare means, and must continue to do so, until
 the treaty is disposed of and the Societies of the Red Cross, so
 indispensable to the effectiveness and utility of the treaty, are
 understood by the people, and measurably established throughout the
 country. To this end, I have at this moment in press a small work of
 a hundred or so pages, explaining the entire subject, its origin,
 history, and purposes, and of which I have ordered five thousand
 copies for gratuitous circulation. They will be ready at the opening
 of Congress or before, and I have four thoroughly formed societies,
 one NATIONAL in this city, completed and incorporated, one Local in
 Dansville, New York, one in the city of Rochester, New York, for the
 county of Monroe, and one similarly organized in Syracuse, New York.
 Both Rochester and Syracuse are forming local, town societies under
 them, and all, in the happy absence of war, are using up their surplus
 energies on the burnt fields of Michigan, to which their agents have
 already taken thousands of dollars to the hungry, and thousands of
 garments to the naked.

 I must beg, Mr. Blaine, that you do not misinterpret my motive in
 making this little revelation of foreign recognition. If the incentive
 had been mere personal vanity, I should probably have found a way to
 make the facts known, short of a decade, but it comes to me now, that
 it is perhaps, under the circumstances, a kind of duty that I should
 report to you on “Foreign Affairs.”

 Begging your pardon for my too long letter, I remain, Mr. Secretary,
 with the most grateful respect,

  Very truly

  CLARA BARTON


The next thing that should be kept clearly in mind is that she did not
establish an organization dependent upon Government appropriations. In
this respect her organization was quite unlike some of those that were
hastily organized to oppose her. At least one of these was organized
with an eye keenly intent upon one form of then existing Government
service, with which it might possibly be affiliated, with an inviting
prospect of salaried positions and official appointments. When the
Treaty of Geneva was ratified, and not only the Senate but House of
Representatives stood ready to do almost anything for Clara Barton,
many of her friends in Congress assumed that the next step would be a
request for a Congressional appropriation to cover the administrative
expense of the Red Cross organization. To every such suggestion Clara
Barton returned an emphatic negative. This was her little creed
announced at the outset, and often reiterated:

 The Red Cross means, not national aid for the needs of the people, but
 the people’s aid for the needs of the Nation.

She would not accept a salary or permit any friend of hers in Congress
to introduce a bill for her financial advantage.

How keenly she felt the importance of establishing the Red Cross upon
this basis, and how sensitive she was to the opposition which grew
formidable just before the treaty was adopted, is shown in a letter
of hers to her long-time friend Frances Willard, who wrote to ask the
reason why she was not moving faster in her work for the relief of the
people in the flooded district along the Mississippi:

  WASHINGTON, Feby. 11, 1882

  DEAR FRANCES WILLARD:

 Yes, I did get your letter telling me about the state of things in
 Mississippi and that all was lost there. I have no doubt but that it
 is the same the country through. It is hard and heavy and bitter; the
 shots of malice and detraction fall thick, but I must stand at the
 helm and steer my ship safely into port. The _Treaty of Geneva_ must
 first be secured. I have but one passage to take it through and that
 is lined thick on every side with guns manned by the Society ladies
 of the Capital of the Nation. The Red Cross, a little stranger craft
 from a foreign land, bearing only the banner of peace and love, and
 her messages of world-wide mercy begging shelter and acceptance in our
 capacious harbor, has chosen me for her pilot to bring her in. Besides
 these guns that open upon her on all sides she runs against the
 chains which have so long held her out--fancied Government defenses
 of “Non-intervention,” “Self-isolation,” beware of “Entangling
 alliances,” “Washington’s Farewell Address,” “Monroe Doctrine,”
 apathy, inertia, general ignorance, national conceit, national
 distrust, a desire to retain the old-time barbarous privileges of
 privateering and piracy which we have hugged as a precious boon
 against every humane treaty since we began. All these my little ship
 has had to meet and breast and bear down, before this new and personal
 attack was opened upon her, so you see I cannot turn aside from my
 duties of a true pilot to contest a new foe. I must bring my ship
 through the natural dangers and anchor it safely in port, though _it_
 and I be riddled with shot. I have thrown over all extra weight, put
 on all sail, muzzled my guns, put my poor tired wounded crew to the
 pumps, nailed the little flag to the mast; and so you see us without
 other word or sign, plunging through the surf, breaking down chain
 after chain, through the fire and smoke, making for the shore. Never
 a messenger of mercy met a more inhospitable welcome, but the poor
 battered pilot has faith in the craft, and faith in God, and at no
 distant day, in spite of all, we shall throw out a sturdy old iron
 anchor to grapple with the reefs of the coast, and run up a little
 pennant beside the cross, “Treaty Ratified.” After this we shall
 be freed from our national disgrace, relieved from the charge and
 duties of safe conduct for our course, and then if there is call for
 arbitration we will be ready.

The success of her work along the Mississippi made it evident that she
must continue the direction of the Red Cross. But that did not by any
means convince her that she was to give up everything else and stay in
Washington. She began to look for something else to do, and something
that would take her far away from the seat of government.

She rather coveted than otherwise the opportunity to show without
advertising the fact that she had other and visible means of support,
and that her work for the Red Cross was not undertaken for lack of
other employment. Moreover, it was expected that its organization would
be kept simple, and its work done promptly in times of emergency.
That was why almost immediately after the Red Cross had become an
actual organization, and she had been constituted its official head
by Presidential nomination and international appointment, and all the
opposing organizations had withered and died, she was willing to accept
a salaried position in work of another kind.

About this time she had a letter from Governor Butler of Massachusetts.
He knew her well and had seen much of her work during the Civil War.
Out of a clear sky came his invitation to her.

  COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
  EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

  BOSTON, January 8, 1883

  MY DEAR MISS BARTON:

 There is a vacancy in the office of Superintendent of the Woman’s
 Reformatory Prison of Massachusetts. It wants a woman at once of
 executive ability and kind-heartedness, with an honest love of the
 work of reformation and care of her living fellow creatures. How would
 that suit you? The salary is not very large. It is $1500.00 a year and
 house and expenses of living. Please let me hear from you at your
 earliest convenience. I am,

  Very truly yours
  BENJ. F. BUTLER

  TO MISS CLARA BARTON
  Dansville, New York


Nothing could have surprised her more than this invitation and it was
four months before she decided to accept it. Even then she accepted
with the stipulation that she would need to close her service in time
to attend the International Convention of the Red Cross in Vienna in
the following year.

Her acceptance of the position involved the giving of a bond of
$10,000. With her customary independence she declined to ask any one to
sign her bond, but deposited with the State Treasurer of Massachusetts
$10,000 of interest-bearing bonds and became her own guarantor.

Prison work was something of which Clara Barton knew nothing and she
did not bring to it any considerable number of theories as to how it
ought to be performed. In her first report, rendered at the end of six
months, she took pains to give large credit to those who had preceded
her. She disclaimed for herself either knowledge or achievement. A
portion of this report will bear record here:

 With only the little experience of six months, you will readily
 concede that it cannot be considered my work; it would be unjust
 arrogance in me to assume it. The noble women and men who toiled for
 its existence, the faithful, tireless body of commissioners, who have
 watched, prayed, and labored unpaid for it, often unthanked since
 with its first baby breath it cried aloud. We, the women of the old
 Commonwealth, and more than all perhaps the two grand women who have
 preceded me in its charge, are entitled to consider Sherborn Prison
 their work. The strong brave-hearted woman, Mrs. Atkinson, who first
 dared to lay her hand, untried, upon that mass of chaos, and command
 order and law, life and reformation, to come out of it, was braver
 than a general. The peaceful, skillful, beloved Dr. Mosher who had the
 womanly courage to follow her, and strive and labor to shape still
 more perfectly the swelling, yeasty mass of human sin and misery till,
 like a wounded color-bearer she fell, bravely praying some comrade to
 bear them on to victory. These are the people whose work that prison
 is, and in their name, and theirs only, let me speak of it a moment
 and commend it to your loving interest and tender care.

 Last May I found, as I entered its great halls, 230 women convicts.
 It has at present 275 to 280 women convicts, and, with those who so
 kindly care for them, make up a family of something over 300. These
 convicts I am expected to feed, clothe, work, and govern, they in
 turn to be fed, clothed, to work and obey. The most comprehensive
 and I believe correct report I could make would be, that we all
 faithfully perform what is expected of us. The manner in which it is
 accomplished, and the causes which lead to the necessity for such
 accomplishment, are, then, the remaining points of importance. The
 causes are as various and widespread as the sins and mishaps which
 beset erring humanity, but if you asked me what proportion I thought
 would be left, after all the temptations of liquor and men were
 removed, I should not require a large sheet on which to write it down.

 Sherborn Reformatory is classed as a State’s Prison, and is thus
 squared by the same rule of discipline as ordinary State Prisons for
 the retention of State criminals.

 And yet it is to be remembered that not a one-fourth part of these
 women are guilty of, or convicted of, any real crime, simply
 offenses--drunkenness and unseemly appearance upon the streets;
 and yet these poor hopeless, misguided, rum-wrecked women and
 night-walking girls are sentenced to the same servitude, subjected
 to the same code of discipline, and go out with the same brand of
 shame upon the brow, nay, far deeper than the clear-headed, cool,
 intelligent, calculating men of Concord, where every inmate is
 convicted of a crime. The sad conviction settles down upon me every
 day that the soul, brains of the crime of the Commonwealth are in
 Concord; the wrecks they have made are in Sherborn; and in my dealing
 with these women, I cannot lose sight of this fact. They are more
 weak than wicked, often more sinned against than sinning. This, to my
 mind, invites a parental, maternal system of government, and to this
 they are all amenable; even the most obstinate yields to a rule of
 kindness, firmly and steadily administered.

The records of this period are necessarily meager. Yet there have
come to the author unsought testimonials of the great work which
Clara Barton accomplished while there. While she never criticized her
predecessors, but gave them generous praise, she stood not at all on
any precedent established by them. She changed the atmosphere of the
place from an institution of punishment to one of instruction and
character-building. One who visited the prison while she was there
has told the author of Clara Barton’s power over the incorrigible;
how women that were violent and untamable by the ordinary methods
became docile under her direction. As for the younger women who were
not hardened, and were often more sinned against than sinning, they
idolized her. She established two letter-boxes in the halls, one to
receive letters addressed to herself. Any one of the three hundred
inmates was at liberty to write to Miss Barton. A number of the letters
which she received were preserved by her and have been read by her
biographer. They were a pathetic group, some of them absurd in their
requests, and others tragic in their appeal for help. The gratitude
of others was quite beyond the poor power of expression possessed by
these girls. In many instances these letters were followed by personal
conferences very fruitful of good.

The other box was for letters of complaint addressed to the Board of
Managers. Any inmate was at liberty to write a letter and place it
there, assured that it would go direct, and that neither Miss Barton
nor any of her assistants would read it. The first box was in constant
use, the second scarcely ever contained a letter.

This was work for which Clara Barton had no natural liking. It was very
far from the type of work she would have chosen. She never supposed
it to be a permanent position. She accepted it because she felt that
her health was sufficiently assured to justify her in undertaking some
definite responsibility, and this was a place where she could go for a
limited time and from it honorably retire. She was glad of a definite
position in some other work than the Red Cross, yet one which did
not compel her to resign her responsibilities in that organization.
She found time while at Sherborn to attend a national gathering of
philanthropic organizations in Denver, and deliver an address on
the Red Cross. And she continued general oversight of its affairs.
She retired from the work with no desire ever to see the inside of
another prison; but also with a deepened interest in all work of that
character, and with increased faith that in such work, as everywhere,
kindness and an appeal to honor and self-respect were more effective
than punishments which degrade and destroy hope.

She continued her work at Sherborn a little longer than she intended,
because the term of Governor Butler was drawing to a close, and he did
not wish to make a temporary appointment. She withdrew at the close of
his term, and the day of her departure was a day of mourning in the
prison at Sherborn.

A few months afterward an international conference was held at
Saratoga and she was invited to deliver an address on prison reform.
The notes of that address are preserved:

 Some steps in life are accounted unwise, some foolish, some foolhardy.
 Until the present hour perhaps the most foolhardy step I have ever
 been led to take was the temporary superintendence of a State Prison
 for the management, control, and reformation of women.

 Though consenting, however unwillingly, to undertake a work of which I
 knew nothing, and under _such_ circumstances, I did undertake it. But,
 good, kind, and loving friends, in point of temerity and foolhardiness
 the effort of this present hour beggars that. That I, with literally
 no experience, no knowledge of the subject, with thoughts running
 always in other channels,--should in any way, however tacitly, have
 given consent to take my place at this desk this evening beside these
 gentlemen who embody in themselves the experimental knowledge of the
 world upon this subject, and before this audience, trained to thought,
 the cultivated cream of the land, is to me past human comprehension.
 The Lord directs--let us obey.

 In May, 1883, after four months of combined importunity from the
 then Governor, General Butler, and all the people interested in and
 controlling the penal institutions of the State of Massachusetts, that
 I take the superintendency of Sherborn Reformatory Prison (and it was,
 I believe, the only point upon which the Governor and the people ever
 did agree), I decided to take it for six months. I remained something
 longer.

 I entered that prison feeling myself so ignorant of all that pertained
 to its line of work and methods and thought, that it seemed to me
 positively _wicked_, to waste my own time and that of the community
 and those who must come under me, in the strengthless, thoughtless
 vacancy of my attempted work--I seemed to myself a kind of empty
 balloon.

 At the end of eight months I went out of it, with a burden of
 thoughts, plans, ways and means, possible and impossible, under which
 my body could scarcely hold itself erect or my feet carry me away.

 I seemed more to myself like an already heavy-ladened ship, which had
 met another in distress and taken on shipwrecked passengers and crew,
 till her gunwales hugged the water and her laboring wheels wearily
 tugged for the land.

 So piled, so criss-crossed, so intricate, so vast, contradictory,
 perplexing, so vexed by customs, so hampered by foolish laws, so bound
 by mercenary ends, so fettered by political ambitions, aspirations,
 asperities and jealousies, to say nothing of the immutable laws of
 natural descent as related to crime--so discouraging was all this to
 be faced from the latter half of a busy life that I wearily and gladly
 turned and laid the burden down on the hands of you skilled laborers,
 and have mainly been content to feel and leave it there.

 The subject of prison reform seems to me to be so vast, and the
 methods by which it is to be attempted so varied, that it can scarcely
 be touched in one talk.

 The first question might be, What is meant by prison reform? and in
 what degree? Palliation or cure? I well remember the one question
 which always confronted me from visitors at Sherborn--“Miss Barton,
 how is it, do you really reform any one here?” My reply was,
 “That depends upon what _you_ consider reform to consist in. If
 you mean to ask if we take women here, badly born, worse raised,
 with inherited, habitual, vagrant crime in their natures, with the
 grogshop and the brothel for their teachers, who never lived a decent
 day or knew a decent night, filthy inside and out, and that by a
 residence of a few months here we are able to send them out to you
 not only good, well-behaved, industrious, cleanly, sober, orderly,
 honest, respectable members of society,--something they never were
 before,--infallible, proof against all the temptations and vices
 which you of the free community on the outside may throw in their
 path, so they shall never fall again; then, No, we reform no one,
 and our prison is a failure; but, if reform may mean that the habits
 which must incidentally grow up in the minds, characters, and tastes
 of these women during a term of two years of sober, industrious,
 and instructed life, in which they shall see only cleanliness and
 order, where the workroom shall replace the street, the quiet cell,
 the school-room, and the chapel in the place of the grogshop and the
 brothel, kindly spoken words of advice, prayer, praise, and song in
 the place of oaths and vulgarity, and a _resolution_ at least to try
 to lead a better life,--if all this may be accounted in the direction
 of reform, then, Yes, a thousand times Yes, we reform all that come
 within our reach.”

 The prison in itself is all well, but the danger lies beyond in the
 temptations, the lures, and the traps of the community into which
 this poor, weak creature is plunged in her first hour of regained
 liberty. I never saw one of these women go out with her little bundle
 of freedom suit, and watched the eager yet timid and half-frightened
 look on her face, and felt the childlike, clinging grasp upon mine,
 and heard the universal “Good-bye, don’t forget me,” that through the
 tears a great prayer did not rise up in my heart, “O God, strengthen
 her weakness--guard her from the temptations and the snares leading
 her down to death, of Thy virtuous and free, outside these prison
 walls.”

 I recall once an official visit from about twenty members of the State
 Legislature, at Boston, for the purpose of overlooking the prison
 and seeing what it might need and how it could be best officially
 served; accordingly they appealed to _me_ for my opinion generally--if
 the prison were what it should be in its _appointments_, if it were
 _large_ enough or _too_ large, etc., and in a general way what I would
 recommend to them to do; as by recent Act they had made me not only
 Superintendent but Treasurer and Steward as well. I replied: “This
 Prison is all very well--a model prison and certainly as large as it
 ought to be for the size of the State; and it is very probable that
 there is not very much that you can directly do for it at present, as
 an Institution; but, Gentlemen, the Institution from which you come
 has the making of the laws by which this Institution exists; any time
 when you _there_ will find a way to make it impossible for the people
 of this State to get intoxicating liquors, upon which to get drunk, I
 will guarantee that in six months the State of Massachusetts may rent
 Sherborn for a shoe manufactory.” I am not sure that _they_ believed
 what I said, but _I_ did and still do.

 True, crime will exist without drunkenness, but to no such extent
 as to require two miles of prison galleries for the women of
 Massachusetts.

 In _this_ country I regard drunkenness as the great father of crime,
 and the mother of prisons, almshouses, asylums, and workhouses--the
 parent of vice and want and the instigator of murder. Whatever bears
 ever so little against this is to my mind “Prison Reform.”

 Then follow in their mournful train the sin-bound _cortège_ of primal
 and secondary causes of vice and crime and which make necessary the
 various methods of treatment which have been so ably discovered that
 no words of mine could throw a single ray of added light upon the
 subject. I can only _concur_, or perhaps express suggestively some
 preferences which may have presented themselves to me.

 In regard to intermediate sentences: I may not be sufficiently clear
 upon the technical points as presented by our good brother, but in a
 general way I would say I am unequivocally in favor of an unfixed term
 of imprisonment when the sentence is given. A fixed time of release is
 an independence to the prisoner beyond the power of his keepers and
 stands directly in the way of all reform.

 I would earnestly advocate everywhere, in all prisons, police
 stations, houses of detention--in short, everywhere, the placing of
 arrested women and women prisoners in charge of women only, and men
 in charge of men. It is just and right for every reason of virtue and
 decency; here again it is largely this contact that has _destroyed_;
 it _cannot restore_.

 I would, for every consideration of humanity, have the most careful,
 intelligent, and scientific investigation made in all prisons for
 any possible tendency to _insanity_ on the part of any prisoner. The
 willful subjection to prison rules and penalties of those from whose
 benighted souls the light of reason and the power of self-control have
 been withdrawn is cruelty inexcusable and accursed in the sight of God
 and man.

 In the name of all mercy single these out and take them to their own
 place.

 Again, I would in the name of humanity lessen so far as possible the
 stimulating qualities of the food generally given out in prisons--more
 of grains, vegetables, and fruit, and less of _meat_. The result of
 this I am confident would be seen in the better temper, more tractable
 natures, lessened irritability, and happier frame of minds on the part
 of all convicts. I would have the food plentiful, but unstimulating,
 and the cooking wholesome. The records of the punishments in a prison
 could not fail in time to demonstrate the beneficial result of this
 course.

 Cannot this thought find somewhere and sometime a little consideration
 in your deliberations? In the name of humanity I suggest it.

 There remains but one subject more which I would name, and but a word
 of that--simply the relations and feeling to be maintained between the
 inmates of a prison and those in charge of them. I would recommend not
 only a uniform kindness and firmness of course on the part of every
 attendant, but a uniform politeness as well. Like begets like in spite
 of everything. It increases self-respect. This they have lost, and
 this they need to have restored so far as may be. Make punishment as
 rare as possible, but _sure_, and in all instances as light as the
 case will admit of. I regard undue severity of punishment as far more
 harmful than no correction at all. Cultivate the love of the convicts
 by all proper means; it is more potent than punishment.

 I believe the record of my last month at Sherborn shows not a single
 punishment among between three and four hundred women. They grew to
 feel that the only hurt of their punishment was the pain it gave me.
 When I met them for the last night in the chapel, and told them we
 should not meet again, and invited each to come and bid me good-bye,
 the sobs and wails that went out, and the tears that went over my
 hands as I held theirs for the last time, were harder for me than all
 the eight months’ work I had done among them. As I passed down the
 long corridors in the dark, unheard by them, at ten o’clock, and the
 low moans and sobs were still going out, it was too much to bear. I
 sought my own room--sank down, cold and shivering with the terrible
 thought that rushed over me--Had it not been all wrong? Was I far
 enough removed from them? Surely we must be too near alike, if not
 akin, or they would never have clung to me with that pitiful love.

 I went out from the prison walls of Sherborn next morning. I have
 never seen a face there since. I have never returned and I have no
 desire to.




CHAPTER XII

THE RED CROSS IN PEACE


The Red Cross as organized in Europe, and as Clara Barton learned of
it there, had no ministry except in times of war. It was one of the
distinctive features of Clara Barton’s plan that the American Red
Cross should give service in any time of national, or possibly of
international, calamity. So far as the Red Cross existed by virtue
of an international treaty, its work was to care for the wounded of
the battle-field; but the American Red Cross, as incorporated in the
District of Columbia, and as operated under the direction of Clara
Barton, offered an agency immediately available for the relief of
suffering wherever the need was greater than could be met by local
benefactions.

It will be remembered that the first service of the American Red
Cross was in the autumn of 1881, in the forest fires of Michigan,
almost a year before the official accession of the United States to
the Treaty of Geneva. The report which reached Clara Barton and the
Nation that half the State of Michigan was on fire, was, of course,
an exaggeration, and she was not deceived by it, but she knew that
the need was greater than could be met by local philanthropy. Already
there had been organized a single unit of the Red Cross, at Dansville,
New York. Clara Barton flung out the Red Cross flag in front of her
home, and called her organization into activity. The two neighboring
cities of Rochester and Syracuse came immediately to her assistance.
Contributions which aggregated three thousand dollars were placed
immediately at her disposal. Miss Barton’s home became a center of
activity, a dépôt for the packing and shipping of supplies. The second
auxiliary of the Red Cross in the United States was organized at
Rochester, with a membership of two hundred and fifty; that at Syracuse
followed immediately. The total amount received and distributed by the
Red Cross in money and material amounted to eighty thousand dollars.

The Michigan fires brought to Miss Barton’s assistance Dr. Julian
B. Hubbell. She had known him in Dansville as an instructor in the
Seminary which was located there. She knew him as a man to be relied
upon. When the forest fires occurred, Dr. Hubbell was a medical student
in the University of Michigan. She wired him at once to proceed to
the scene of the fire and give her accurate information. Dr. Hubbell
reported that hundreds of people had been suffocated and burned to
death in the rapid sweep of the flames, and that many thousands were
homeless and in need of shelter, food, clothing, and medical care.
Miss Barton at once commissioned Dr. Hubbell as field agent of the
Red Cross. This was the beginning of a relationship which was never
broken until the death of Clara Barton. Dr. Hubbell completed his
medical course, and was commissioned as general field officer of the
American National Red Cross. This position he occupied from 1881 until
her resignation in 1904. He was with her in every one of the American
fields of service; accompanied her to Turkey at the time of the
Armenian massacres; went with her to Cuba at the time of the Spanish
War; and was as indispensable to her as her own right hand. After the
termination of her presidency of the American Red Cross, he remained
near her, was with her in her last illness, and stood beside her when
she died. With her nephew Stephen, he accompanied her body to the old
home in Oxford and wept beside her grave. He was among the friends, and
their number was not small, who were faithful to her to the very end of
life.

It is not the purpose of the present author to relate in detail the
story of the work of the Red Cross during the next twenty-three
years. Clara Barton herself has done that in a large octavo volume of
nearly seven hundred pages. To that book reference must be had for
any adequate idea of her service for almost a quarter of a century.
Almost every year beheld a calamity of sufficient magnitude to call for
the official activity of the American Red Cross. The mere list of the
fields of its service is notable:

  1881, the Michigan forest fires.
  1882, the Mississippi River floods.
  1883, the Mississippi River floods.
  1883, the tornado in Louisiana and Alabama.
  1883, the Balkan War.
  1884, the Ohio and Mississippi River floods.
  1885, the Texas famine.
  1886, the Charleston earthquake.
  1888, the tornado at Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
  1888, the Florida yellow-fever epidemic.
  1889, the Johnstown flood.
  1892, the Russian famine.
  1893, the tornado at Pomeroy, Iowa.
  1893 and 94, the hurricane and tidal wave in the South Carolina
   islands.
  1896, the Armenian massacres in Turkey in Asia Minor.
  1898 to 1900, the Cuban Reconcentrado relief.
  1898, the Spanish-American War.
  1900, the Galveston storm and tidal wave.
  1904, the typhoid fever epidemic at Butler, Pennsylvania.

In almost every instance Clara Barton went in person to the field.
Where she went was order, efficiency, sympathy, and comfort. In the
days of the Civil War the official sign of a hospital was the yellow
banner, still used in the quarantine service to designate a hospital
for the treatment of contagious diseases. It was and is a respectable
and worthy emblem, but there was nothing very inspiring about it.
Where Clara Barton went on her missions of mercy, two flags floated,
the Stars and Stripes and the beautiful white flag with its cross of
blazing red.

Clara Barton loved the color red. The red rose was the flower of her
family. A dash of red she almost invariably had about her clothing
somewhere. It was altogether in keeping with her personal tastes that
the emblem which came to symbolize her life-work was of the color
which never failed to gladden her eye. In 1881 she set out, as she
herself related in her first article for the Associated Press, to make
the name and emblem of the Red Cross as familiar in America, as for
many years it had been in almost every other civilized nation. She
succeeded in doing this, not simply by a campaign of publicity, but by
the practical agency of applied mercy. When fire or famine or flood
devastated a region, and its victims were homeless and despairing, and
local agencies for relief were overworked and working aimlessly or at
cross-purposes, the unfurling of the flag of the Red Cross was the sign
of hope. It meant not only human kindness and sympathy, but confidence
and efficiency and success.

From every one of these twenty fields Clara Barton came back laden down
with the grateful testimonials of the communities to which she had
brought comfort and help.

A very brief outline of her work in these several fields may be
summarized from her own reports. The work for the Michigan forest
fires has already been referred to, and reference has been made to the
first expedition of the Red Cross for the relief of the sufferers from
the Mississippi floods. A further word should be said concerning the
service of the Red Cross during the floods, and then a brief summary of
the work in each of the other fields.


MISSISSIPPI AND OHIO RIVER FLOODS--1882-83

 The spring rise of the waters of the Mississippi brought great
 devastation, and a cry went over the country in regard to the
 sufferings of the inhabitants of the Mississippi Valley. For hundreds
 of miles the great river was out of its bed and raging madly over the
 country, sweeping in its course not only the homes, but often the
 people, the animals, and many times the land itself. This constituted
 a work of the relief clearly within the bounds of the civil part
 of our treaty, and again we prepared for work. Again our infant
 organization sent its field agent, Dr. Hubbell, to the scene of
 disaster, where millions of acres of the richest valley, cotton and
 sugar lands of America, and thousands upon thousands of homes under
 the waters of the mightiest of rivers--where the swift-rising floods
 overtook alike man and beast in their flight of terror, sweeping them
 ruthlessly to the Gulf beyond, or leaving them clinging in famishing
 despair to some trembling roof or swaying tree-top till relief could
 reach and rescue them.

 The National Association, with no general fund, sent of its personal
 resources what it was able to do, and so acceptable did these prove
 and so convincing were the beneficences of the work that the cities of
 Memphis, Vicksburg, and New Orleans desired to be permitted to form
 associate societies and work under the National Association. This was
 permitted, and those societies have remained until the present time,
 New Orleans organizing for the entire State of Louisiana. The city
 of Rochester, proud and grateful of its success in the disaster a few
 months before, again came to the front and again rendered excellent
 service.

 In the spring of 1883 occurred the first great rise of the Ohio River;
 one thousand miles in extent. This river, although smaller than the
 Mississippi, is more rapid in its course, and its valleys hold the
 richest grain lands, the most cultivated farms, representing, in fact,
 the best farming interests of America.

 The destruction of property was even greater here than in the
 cotton and cane lands of the Mississippi. Again our field agent was
 dispatched and did excellent work. The entire country was aroused, and
 so liberal were the contributions to the various committees of relief
 that when Dr. Hubbell retired from the field, having completed the
 work, he had still unexpended funds in hand. But they were soon needed.


THE LOUISIANA AND MISSISSIPPI TORNADO OF 1883

 In less than a month occurred the fearful tornado of Louisiana and
 Mississippi, which cut a swath clear of all standing objects for
 thirty miles in width and several hundred miles in length, running
 southeast from the Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico.

 Our special agent for the South, Colonel F. R. Southmayd, took charge
 of the Red Cross relief in this disaster, and so efficient was his
 work that societies struggled for organization under him and the Red
 Cross was hailed as a benediction wherever he passed. This was in May,
 1883.

 Our association now enjoyed for eight months a respite from active
 work. It was surely needed. It was the longest rest we had yet known,
 and afforded some small opportunity to gather up its records of
 past labors, organize some societies, and compile a history of the
 Red Cross, so much needed for the information of our people and so
 earnestly asked for by them as well as by the United States Senate.


THE OHIO RIVER FLOODS OF 1884

 The rapidly melting snows of February, 1884, brought the thousand
 miles of the Ohio River again out of its bed. A cry went out all
 over the country for help. The Government, through Congress, took
 immediate action and appropriated several hundred thousand dollars for
 relief, to be applied through the War Department. The Red Cross agents
 must again repair to the field, its societies be again notified.

 But its president felt that, if she were to be called every year
 to direct the relief work of the association in these inundations,
 it was incumbent upon her to visit the scene in person, to see for
 herself what floods were like, to learn the necessities and be able to
 direct with the wisdom born of actual knowledge of the subject; and
 accordingly, with ten hours’ preparation, she joined Dr. Hubbell on
 his way and proceeded to Pittsburgh, the head of the Ohio River. There
 the societies were telegraphed that Cincinnati would be headquarters
 and that money and supplies should be sent there. This done, we
 proceeded to Cincinnati by rail.

 Any description of this city upon our entrance would fall so far short
 of the reality as to render it useless.

 The surging river had climbed up the bluffs like a devouring monster
 and possessed the town; large steamers could have plied along its
 business streets; ordinary vocations were abandoned. Bankers and
 merchants stood in its relief houses and fed the hungry populace,
 and men and women were out in boats passing baskets of food to pale,
 trembling hands stretched out to reach it from third-story windows of
 the stately blocks and warehouses of that beautiful city. Sometimes
 the water soaked away the foundations and the structure fell with
 a crash and was lost in the floods below; in one instance seven
 lives went out with the falling building; and this was one city, and
 probably the best protected and provided locality in a thousand miles
 of thickly populated country.

 It had not been my intention to remain at the scene of disaster,
 but rather to see, investigate, establish an agency, and return to
 national headquarters at Washington, which in the haste of departure
 had been left imperfectly cared for. But I might almost say, in
 military parlance, that I was “surprised and captured.”

 I had made no call beyond the Red Cross societies,--expected no
 supplies from other sources,--but scarcely had news of our arrival
 at Cincinnati found its way to the public press when telegrams of
 money and checks, from all sides and sources, commenced to come in,
 with letters announcing the sending of material. The express office
 and freight depots began filling up until within two weeks we were
 compelled to open large supply rooms, which were generously tendered
 to the use of the Red Cross. A description could no more do justice
 to our flood of supplies than to the flood of waters which had made
 them necessary--cases, barrels and bales of clothing, food, household
 supplies, new and old; all that intelligent awakened sympathy could
 suggest was there in such profusion that, so far from thinking
 of leaving it, one must call all available help for its care and
 distribution.

 The Government would supply the destitute people with food, tents, and
 army blankets, and had placed its military boats upon the river to
 rescue the people and issue rations until the first great need should
 be supplied.

 The work of the Red Cross is supplemental and it sought for the
 special wants likely to be overlooked in this great general supply and
 the necessities _outside_ the limits of governmental aid. The search
 was not difficult. The Government provided neither fuel nor clothing.
 It was but little past midwinter. A cyclone struck the lower half of
 the river with the water at its greatest height and whole villages
 were swept away in a night. The inhabitants escaped in boats, naked
 and homeless. Hail fell to the depth of several inches and the entire
 country was encased in sleet and ice. The water had filled the coal
 mines, so abundant in that vicinity, until no fuel could be obtained.
 The people were more likely to freeze than starve, and against this
 there was no provision.

 We quickly removed our headquarters from Cincinnati to Evansville,
 three hundred miles below and at the head of the recent scene of
 disaster. A new stanch steamer of four hundred tons’ burden was
 immediately chartered and laden to the water’s edge with clothing and
 coal; good assistants, both men and women, were taken on board; the
 Red Cross flag was hoisted and, as night was setting in, after a day
 of intense cold--amid surging waters and crashing ice, the floating
 wrecks of towns and villages, great uprooted giants of the forest
 plunging madly to the sea, the suddenly unhoused people wandering
 about the river-banks, or huddled in strange houses with fireless
 hearths--the clear-toned bell and shrill whistle of the _Josh V.
 Throop_ announced to the generous inhabitants of a noble city that
 from the wharves of Evansville was putting out the first Red Cross
 relief boat that ever floated on American waters.

 The destroyed villages and hamlets lay thick on either bank, and the
 steamer wove its course diagonally from side to side calling the
 people to the boat, finding a committee to receive and distribute,
 and, learning as nearly as possible the number of destitute persons,
 put off the requisite quantity of clothing and coal, and steamed away
 quickly and quietly, leaving sometimes an astonished _few_, sometimes
 a _multitude_ to gaze after and wonder who she was, whence she came,
 what that strange flag meant, and, most of all, to thank God with
 tears and prayers for what she brought.

 In this manner the Red Cross proceeded to Cairo, a distance of four
 hundred miles, where the Ohio joins the Mississippi River, which
 latter at that time had not risen and was exciting no apprehension.
 Returning, we revisited and resupplied the destitute points. The
 Government boats running over the same track were genial and friendly
 with us, and faithful and efficient in their work.

 It should be said that, notwithstanding all the material we had
 shipped and distributed, so abundant had been the liberality of the
 people that, on our return to Evansville, we found our supply greater
 than at any previous time.

 At this moment, and most unexpectedly, commenced the great rise of
 the Mississippi River, and a _second_ cry went out to the Government
 and the people for instant help. The strongest levees were giving way
 under the sudden pressure, and even the inundation of the city of New
 Orleans was threatened. Again the Government appropriated money, and
 the War Department sent out its rescue and ration boats, and again the
 Red Cross prepared for its supplemental work.

 In an overflow of the Mississippi, owing to the level face of the
 country and the immense body of water, the valley is inundated at
 times thirty miles in width, thus rendering it impossible to get
 animals to a place of safety. Great numbers drown and the remainder,
 in a prolonged overflow, have largely starved, the Government having
 never included the domestic animals in its work of relief. This seemed
 an omission of vital importance, both humanely and economically
 considered, and the Red Cross prepared to go to the relief of the
 starving animals of the Mississippi Valley. It would also supply
 clothing to the destitute people whom the Government would feed.

 The navigation of the Mississippi River calls for its own style of
 boats and pilotage, the latter being both difficult and dangerous,
 especially with the changed channels and yawning crevasses of a flood.

 The steamer _Throop_ was left at Evansville and the _Mattie Bell_
 chartered at St. Louis and laden with corn, oats, hay, meal, and salt
 for cattle; clothing and cooking utensils for the destitute people;
 tea, coffee, rice, sugar, and medicines for the sick; and as quickly
 as possible followed the Government steamers leaving the same port
 with rations of meat and meal.

 We finished the voyage of relief, having covered the Ohio River from
 Cincinnati to Cairo and back twice, and the Mississippi from St.
 Louis to New Orleans and return, occupying four months’ time on the
 rivers, in our own chartered boats, finishing at Pittsburgh and taking
 rail for Washington on the first of July, having traveled over eight
 thousand miles, and distributed in relief, of money and estimated
 material, $175,000.

 The Government had expended an appropriation from the Treasury on
 the same waters of $150,000 in money, and distributed it well. The
 difference was that ours was not appropriated; we gathered it as we
 used it.


THE TEXAS FAMINE OF 1885-86

 Occasional rumors reached us in the years 1885 and 1886 about a drouth
 in Texas and consequent suffering, but they were so contradictory and
 widely at variance that the public took little or no heed of them.
 During the year of 1886 the Reverend John Brown, a North Presbyterian
 minister, located at Albany, Shackelford County, Texas, began making
 appeals by circular and oral address to the people of the Northern
 States, in which he asserted that there were a hundred thousand
 families in northwestern Texas who were utterly destitute and on the
 verge of starvation. He stated that since the close of the war a large
 number of poor families had been constantly crowding into Texas from
 the Southern States principally, induced thither by land agents and
 others, who gave glowing representations of the character of the soil
 for farming purposes.

 These poor people, by hard labor and industry, had been generally able
 to make a living and nothing more. The last fall they had planted
 wheat and other grain quite extensively, but the rains came not and
 everything perished; and in the following spring and summer, too,
 everything put into the ground was blasted by the hot winds, so that
 not a thing was raised for man or beast. For fifteen months no rain
 had fallen, and the condition of the people was pitiable and called
 aloud to the charitable throughout the land for relief. They must be
 carried through to the next summer or they would perish. At a meeting
 of the citizens of Albany, Texas, they decided that the task of
 relieving the sufferers was greater than the well-to-do people of the
 State were able to undertake, and that an appeal should be made to the
 good-hearted people of the North for immediate aid. The Governor of
 Texas also published an appeal to the people of the whole land, asking
 for food for these people. But as there was no concerned action, and
 so many denials of the stories of suffering, little or nothing in the
 way of relief work was accomplished for some time. Spasmodic attempts
 were made, and some food for man and beast was contributed, but not
 enough to relieve a hundredth part of the needy.

 The Reverend Doctor Brown went to the State Capital and endeavored to
 interest the Legislature in the matter, but there were seemingly so
 much misunderstanding and unbelief, and so many conflicting interests
 to reconcile, that he failed to receive any substantial assurances and
 left the place in disgust. When the citizens of Texas could not agree
 as to the necessities of their own people, it was not to be expected
 that the citizens of the country would take much interest in them,
 hence the relief movement languished from inanition.

 About the middle of January, 1887, Dr. Brown came to Washington and,
 as solicitor and receiving agent for the committee which had issued an
 appeal to the country, appealed to me, as president of the American
 National Red Cross, asking our organization to come to the relief of
 the people, who were in a deplorable state, greatly needing food and
 clothing. I immediately shipped to Texas all the stores that were then
 in our warehouse, but they were no great quantity.

 An appeal direct to the Red Cross required immediate attention, and I
 at once sought a conference with President Cleveland, who was greatly
 worried over the contradictory stories that were constantly printed,
 and was anxious to learn the truth about the matter. When I said that
 I should go to Texas and see for myself, he was greatly pleased, and
 requested me to report to him the exact situation just as soon as I
 had satisfied myself by personal investigation.

 Dr. Hubbell and I proceeded directly to Albany, Texas, where we
 arrived near the end of January. We were met by the leading citizens
 and most heartily welcomed and accorded every privilege and attention.
 We began our investigations at once in a systematic way, carefully
 noting everything we heard and saw; and in the course of a two weeks’
 trip over the afflicted region, we learned the extent of the need and
 formulated plans for its relief.

 Making Albany our object point, we traveled by private conveyance over
 such territory as we thought sufficient to give a correct knowledge of
 the condition of the country and the people. We met large numbers of
 the residents, both collectively and at their homes, and learned from
 them personally and by actual observation their condition and what
 they had to depend upon during the next few months. It will be borne
 in mind that when we entered upon this investigation little or no
 relief had come from the State, and none was positively assured.

 Almost no rain had fallen during a period of eighteen months; two
 planted crops had perished in the ground, and the seed wheat sown the
 previous fall gave no signs of life. The dust was rolling over the
 great wind-swept fields, where the people had hidden their last little
 forlorn hope of borrowed seed, and literally a heaven of brass looked
 down upon an earth of iron.

 Here were twenty to forty counties, of a size commensurate with Texan
 dimensions, occupied by new settlers, making their first efforts in
 the pioneer work of developing home life in an untried country, soil,
 and climate. They had put their all into the new home and the little
 stock they could afford for its use. They had toiled faithfully,
 planted two and three times, as long as there was anything to plant
 or sow, and in most instances failed to get back their seed. Many had
 grown discouraged and left the country. The people were not actually
 starving, but they were in the direst want for many of the necessities
 of life, and it was only a matter of days when they would have reached
 the condition of the _reconcentrados_ as we later found them in Cuba.
 Hundreds of thousands of cattle had died for the want of food and
 water, and their drying carcasses and bleaching bones could be seen in
 every direction as the eye wandered over the parched surface of the
 plains.

 I at once saw that in the vastness of its territory and varying
 interests the real need of these suffering communities was not
 understood by the Texas people--it had not come home to them; but that
 once comprehending, it would be their wish to have it known and cared
 for by themselves and not by others outside of the State.

 Assuring these poor people that their actual condition should be made
 known to their own people, through the authoritative means of the
 Red Cross, and that they should be speedily cared for, we bade them
 farewell and hurried away to Dallas, where we intended to send out a
 statement to the people of the State.

 Arriving there, we sought an interview with Colonel Belo, of the
 Dallas “News,” and laid before him the result of our observations.
 He placed the columns of his paper at our disposal, and through them
 we enlightened the people of the true status of affairs in their own
 State. The response was as quick as it was gratifying, and thence
 onward there was no further necessity for appealing to any one outside
 of the State limits. Indeed, that act in the first place was the
 greatest mistake, as to the average Texan, feeling a genuine pride in
 the State’s wealth and resources, it savored of frauds and imposition,
 and prejudiced him against the brother who would pass him by and
 appeal to outsiders.

 The Texas Legislature appropriated one hundred thousand dollars for
 food, and in the meantime rain began to fall and the entire aspect
 of affairs began to change for the better. But there were still many
 needs unprovided for--clothing, fuel, seeds for gardens and fields,
 live stock, and many other things--and it was necessary to place these
 needs before the people. This the “News” took upon itself to do; and
 upon my suggestion it opened a popular subscription and announced that
 it would receive contributions of seed or cash and would publish the
 same from day to day and turn them over to the constituted authorities
 appointed to disburse them. In order to encourage the movement I
 inaugurated it with the first subscription, and from that time until
 now I do not believe any one has heard of any need in Texas that has
 not been taken care of by her own people.

The Texas famine brought into sharp relief the ideals of Clara Barton
in emergencies of this character. It was at first proposed to meet the
situation by a Government appropriation; and a bill for such relief,
passed by both houses of Congress, was promptly vetoed by President
Cleveland. This veto brought severe criticism upon the President, but
Clara Barton sustained him. What was needed in such an emergency,
as she believed, was not to fly to Congress with appeals for an
appropriation, but to call upon the people to send relief through an
accredited agency that would account for the money and disburse it in
systematic fashion. Her success in the Texas famine abundantly proved
the wisdom of her course.


THE MOUNT VERNON, ILLINOIS, TORNADO

 On Sunday, February 19, 1888, a destructive tornado occurred at Mount
 Vernon, Illinois. Within three minutes after the fury of the storm had
 struck the town, thirty people had been killed and scores of others
 injured, and an immense amount of property destroyed.

 To add to the horrors already wrought, fire broke out in a dozen
 places. Those who were uninjured quickly came to the rescue, quenching
 the flames and exerting themselves to relieve the unfortunate victims,
 who were, in most cases, pinned down under the wreckage of their
 houses. All night long these brave men and women worked, and when
 morning came the few houses that remained standing were filled with
 the dead and injured.

 Appeals for assistance were sent out to the people of the country,
 but, through an improper statement of the situation, the public
 was misled, and, not realizing the pressing needs of the stricken
 community, failed to take up the matter in a business-like manner, and
 the town was left to suffer for a little of the great abundance that
 was around them. In their extremity the despairing citizens appealed
 to the Red Cross for aid, which responded at once.

 A most deplorable situation was presented: the people were homeless
 and helpless, neglected, and in a state of mind bordering on insanity.

 After a somewhat hasty examination of the situation, the following
 simple message was sent to both the Associated and the United Press:

 The pitiless snow is falling on the heads of three thousand people who
 are without homes, without food or clothing and without money.

  CLARA BARTON


With only this little word to explain the needs, our generous American
people responded promptly and liberally, as they always do when they
fully understand what is needed.

It was unnecessary to remain longer than two weeks with these people,
who, as soon as they recovered from the first shock of their great
misfortune, and when they felt that kind friends were by their side,
lending them moral and substantial support, manfully commenced to
bring order out of chaos, to rebuild their town and resume their usual
vocations. Large quantities of relief supplies of all kinds quickly
came to hand, and, when we were ready to leave them, the Citizens’
Committee had in its treasury a cash balance of ninety thousand
dollars. And thus, with their blessings ringing in our ears, we left
them.


THE YELLOW FEVER EPIDEMIC IN FLORIDA IN 1888

 During the month of August, 1888, yellow fever broke out in
 Jacksonville, and in September it was declared to be epidemic, the
 usual alarm and exodus of citizens taking place. On September 8,
 heroic measures to depopulate the city were taken. Every person that
 was still well and could leave was requested to go; very little urging
 was necessary. Camps were established outside of the city, where those
 who had not the means to go farther and get better quarters were
 enabled to live under medical surveillance, and away from the seat of
 infection.

 The mayor of Jacksonville had made an appeal for doctors and nurses,
 which had been quickly responded to, and they were doing everything
 possible to attend to the rapidly increasing number of patients.

 On the formation of the Red Cross Society of New Orleans in 1893,
 it had been carefully and wisely arranged that, in case of yellow
 fever becoming epidemic in any place, no unacclimated persons, or
 those not immune, should be sent as assistants by the Red Cross. New
 Orleans was the home of the famous “Old Howard Association,” that
 had won its reputation and worn its grateful renown from the horrors
 of Memphis to the present time. This body freely united with the Red
 Cross of New Orleans, and it was arranged that the Southern States,
 through this society, should provide all Red Cross nurses for yellow
 fever, and that the northern portion of the country should raise the
 money to pay and provide them. We felt this to be a security, and an
 immediate provision which the country had never before known. Fearing
 that this might not, at its first inception, be fully understood,
 I called at once on Dr. Hamilton, then in charge of the Marine
 Hospital, explaining it to him, and offering all the nurses that
 could be required, even to hundreds, all experienced and organized
 for immediate action. Perhaps it was not strange that a provision,
 so new and so unknown in the sad history of plagues and epidemics,
 should have seemed Utopian, and as such been brushed aside as not only
 useless, but self-seeking and obtrusive. Like the entire organization
 of which it was a part, it had to wait and win its way against custom
 or even prejudice, by honest worth and stern necessity. It was the
 “old, old story.” The world takes reform hard and slow.

 As it was, however, we did what we could. Headquarters were
 established at the Riggs House in Washington. The good-hearted people
 of the North, who felt that they must go to Florida, had by some means
 gotten the idea that they must have a pass from the Central Committee
 of the Red Cross in order to go. They came to us in hundreds and
 were mercifully held back from a scourge for which they would have
 been both food and fuel, whilst the entire people of the country,
 in pity and horror at the reports received, were holding meetings,
 raising money, and pouring funds like water into the doomed city of
 Jacksonville, where the scourge had centered, and to which every
 effort was made to confine it.

 Not realizing the opposition there might prove to be to our nurses,
 we called upon their old-time leader, Colonel F. R. Southmayd,
 the efficient secretary of the Red Cross Society of New Orleans,
 instructing him to enlist a body of nurses and take them at once to
 the fever district. He enlisted thirty, both men and women, white and
 colored, took a part with him, the remainder following next day.

 Refugees who had fled from Jacksonville carried the plague to several
 smaller places in the surrounding country, where in some instances it
 acquired quite a foothold; but, owing to their obscurity and the lack
 of communication with the outside world, they were left alone to fight
 the disease as best they could. Among these places was the little town
 of MacClenny, where, as soon as it became known that there was a case
 of fever within its limits, all trains were ordered to rush through
 without stopping, and an armed quarantine was placed around it with
 orders to shoot any one attempting to leave the town. Thus left to
 their fate, without doctors, nurses, or food, in any quantity, their
 situation was pitiable. There were a number of volunteers who had made
 attempts to get into MacClenny, but, owing to the unreasoning panic
 existing, they were not permitted to enter the place.

 Colonel Southmayd had heard of these neglected people, and he
 succeeded while _en route_ to Jacksonville in dropping off ten nurses
 so much needed at MacClenny. How he did this, I have told in a little
 brochure entitled “The MacClenny Nurses,” that was issued at the close
 of the year 1888.

 The fever spread during the fall to several points in Georgia,
 Alabama, and Mississippi, and resulted in the usual panic and flight
 from many places; but happily the disease got no great headway before
 the frost put an end to its career.

 It was late in November when we closed this work; worn and
 disheartened as we were by both the needful and the needless hardships
 of the campaign, we were glad of the two or three months in which no
 call for action was made upon us.


THE JOHNSTOWN FLOOD OF 1889

 On the 30th of May, 1889, occurred the calamity of Johnstown,
 Pennsylvania, with all its horrors. So frightful and improbable were
 the reports that it required twenty-four hours to satisfy ourselves
 that it was not a canard.

 In order to get an intelligent idea of this disaster and the terrible
 damage wrought by the irresistible waters, it may be well to give a
 short sketch of the city of Johnstown and its adjacent surroundings.
 Before the flood there were thirty thousand people in this busy
 community, which embraced the city of Johnstown proper and numerous
 suburbs. The city is situated at the junction of Stony Creek and the
 Little Conemaugh, forming the Conemaugh River. These streams are
 liable to sudden overflows, and, owing to the contraction of the
 waterway in the lower part of the city by the dumping of cinders and
 slag from the large ironworks on the banks of the stream, and also
 encroachments by riparian owners, the upper portion of the city is
 liable to inundations. About nine miles above the city a dam had been
 thrown across the Little Conemaugh River many years ago for commercial
 purposes, but had been abandoned and the site with much surrounding
 property had been subsequently purchased by a sporting club, whose
 membership embraced some of the wealthiest citizens of Pennsylvania.
 These gentlemen were attracted by the picturesque scenery and the
 hunting and fishing of the vicinity, and they spent thousands of
 dollars in improving and beautifying their holdings. The dam was
 raised to a height of over seventy feet and held an immense body of
 water covering many acres.

 This large mass of water was a constant source of fear to the
 inhabitants of the lower valleys, who were aware of the danger that
 threatened them, and many protests were made against the continuance
 of the danger; but owing to the prominence of the owners of the dam,
 and the strong social and political influence they exerted, they
 remained unmolested in the possession of the monster that was to break
 its bounds and carry death and destruction in its pitiless pathway.

 A steady rainfall for several days in the latter part of May caused
 overflows in all the streams in western Pennsylvania, and much of the
 city of Johnstown was already under water to a depth of from two to
 ten feet, when suddenly the dam over the Little Conemaugh gave way,
 and its flood, resembling a moving mountain of water thirty feet high,
 was precipitated upon the doomed city. Numbers of the inhabitants,
 who had carried the fear of this disaster in their minds for years,
 had become so alarmed by the long-continued rains, and the floods
 that were already upon them, took their families and fled to the high
 grounds on the hillsides. But the great majority of the people, who,
 though fully aware of the danger, had lived with it so long that they
 had become careless and indifferent, took no precautions whatever.
 These were overwhelmed by the tide almost without warning, and before
 they could seek safety were swept away.

 The number of lives lost will never be accurately known; but in all
 probability it reached in the entire valley nearly five thousand. It
 is said that property to the amount of twelve millions of dollars was
 absolutely lost.

 It was at the moment of supreme affliction when we arrived at
 Johnstown. The waters had subsided, and those of the inhabitants who
 had escaped the fate of their fellows were gazing over the scene of
 destruction and trying to arouse themselves from the lethargy that had
 taken hold of them when they were stunned by the realization of all
 the woe that had been visited upon them. How nobly they responded to
 the call of duty! How much of the heroic there is in our people when
 it is needed! No idle murmurings of fate, but, true to the godlike
 instincts of manhood and fraternal love, they quickly banded together
 to do the best that the wisest among them could suggest.

 For five weary months it was our portion to live amid these scenes
 of destruction, desolation, poverty, want, and woe; sometimes in
 tents, sometimes without; in rain and mud, and a lack of the commonest
 comforts, until we could build houses to shelter ourselves and those
 around us. Without a safe, and with a dry-goods box for a desk, we
 conducted financial affairs in money and material to the extent of
 nearly half a million dollars.

 When our five months’ work was completed, we had only to turn over to
 the hands of the leaders of the town, our warehouse with its entire
 remaining stock, amounting to some thousands of dollars; the care
 of the infirmary; one of our trained clerks, with all papers and
 accounts of our relief work from the day of its inception; one of
 our experienced working men to handle transportation--to fit up for
 them large, warm rooms for winter use; give them our blessing; accept
 theirs in fullest measure; say good-bye to them and to our faithful
 helpers, with heavy hearts and choking voices, and return to our home,
 bearing the record of a few months of faithful endeavor among a people
 as patient and brave as people are made, as noble and grateful as
 falls to the lot of human nature to be. Enterprising, industrious,
 and hopeful, the new Johnstown, phœnix-like, rose from its ruins more
 beautiful than the old, with a ceaseless throb of grateful memory for
 every kind act rendered, and every thought of sympathy given her in
 her great hour of desolation and woe. God bless her, and God bless all
 who helped save her!

 We had employed during our sojourn in Johnstown a working force of
 fifty men and women, whom we had housed, fed, and paid, with the
 exception of the volunteers who worked for the good they could do and
 would accept nothing. The means which we so largely handled came from
 everywhere; accounts were rendered for everything, and no word of
 business complication ever came to us. There never has in all our work.

 There was much to do in Johnstown after we left; buildings to remove
 and property to care for when it had served its purpose and the ground
 became needed. But there is always a right time for any benevolent
 work to cease; a time when the community is ready to resume its own
 burdens, and when an offered charity is an insult to the honest and
 independent, and a degradation to the careless and improvident,
 tending to pauperize and make them an added burden on their
 better-minded fellow citizens. And then, the moment the tradesman is
 able to reëstablish himself, he looks with jealous eyes on any agency
 that diverts possible business from his channels. Thus it is not only
 wise, but just to all concerned to withdraw all gratuities from a
 people the instant they are able to gain even a meager self-support.

 A rather curious circumstance, somewhat on the line of this
 reflection, fell to our lot after leaving Johnstown. The houses that
 we had built and furnished were indispensable to the tenants during
 the winter, when there were no other houses to be had; but in the
 spring the city, rejuvenated, began to build up again, and we were
 notified that the land on which our large houses were standing was
 needed by the owners, who wished to use it for their own purposes, and
 they requested the Red Cross to remove its buildings. We promptly sent
 an agent to attend to the matter, and he began the work of vacating
 the premises. There was no hardship involved in this, as all the
 tenants were by this time in condition to pay rent, the relief fund of
 $1,600,000 having been distributed among them in proportion to their
 losses, and there were houses that they could get; in a few days our
 houses were empty. Then a new factor entered into the situation. When
 it became generally known that the Red Cross must remove these immense
 houses, and that a large quantity of lumber and house furnishings
 were to be disposed of, the self-interests of the dealers in those
 commodities were at once aroused, and they strongly protested against
 the gratuitous distribution of those articles among the people of
 Johnstown, asserting that the inhabitants were now prospering and had
 the means to buy everything they needed, and that a gift from us of
 any of these things would be an injustice to the honest traders who
 were trying to reëstablish themselves.

 We saw the justice of their objection and gave assurances that no
 injury should be done them; still, to have fully conformed to their
 idea and transported the entire material to some other point would
 have put the Red Cross to an amount of trouble and cost unjust to
 itself.

 I am not prepared to say that our quiet field agent in charge of the
 work did not find resting-places for very much of this material in
 still needy homes, where it did no harm to any one and for which no
 one but the pitiful recipients were the wiser.

 Notwithstanding the fact that we took away from Johnstown as little
 material and furniture as was possible, after quietly disposing of
 the greater part of it, and this at an expense and inconvenience
 to ourselves which we could ill afford, there were those who could
 not understand why we should take _anything_ away; and their unkind
 misconstruction and criticisms have scarcely ceased echoing even to
 this late day.

 The paths of charity are over roadways of ashes; and he who would
 tread them must be prepared to meet opposition, misconstruction,
 jealousy, and calumny. Let his work be that of angels, still it will
 not satisfy all.

 There is always an aftermath of attempted relief where none is needed,
 and more or less criticism of any work, for it is always so much
 easier to say how a thing ought to be done than it is to do it.

 These little unpleasantnesses, however, cannot deprive us of the
 thousand memories of gratitude, appreciation, and kindnesses
 exchanged, which were mutually helpful; nor of the many lifelong
 friendships formed which will bless us all our day.

As Miss Barton was leaving Johnstown the “Daily Tribune” of that city
published the following editorial:

 How shall we thank Miss Clara Barton and the Red Cross for the help
 they have given us? It cannot be done; and if it could, Miss Barton
 does not want our thanks. She has simply done her duty as she saw
 it and received her pay--the consciousness of a duty performed
 to the best of her ability. To see us upon our feet, struggling
 forward, helping ourselves, caring for the sick and infirm and
 impoverished--that is enough for Miss Barton. Her idea has been fully
 worked out, all her plans accomplished. What more could such a woman
 wish?

 We cannot thank Miss Barton in words. Hunt the dictionaries of all
 languages through and you will not find the signs to express our
 appreciation of her and her work. Try to describe the sunshine. Try to
 describe the starlight. Words fail, and in dumbness and silence we bow
 to the idea which brought her here. God and humanity! Never were they
 more closely linked than in stricken Johnstown.

Governor Beaver of Pennsylvania expressed the appreciation of the
people of the State in the following letter:

 In this matter of sheltering the people, as in others of like
 importance, Miss Clara Barton, president of the Red Cross Association,
 was most helpful. At a time when there was a doubt if the Flood
 Commission could furnish houses of suitable character and with the
 requisite promptness, she offered to assume charge, and she erected
 with the funds of the association three large apartment houses which
 afforded comfortable lodgings for many houseless people. She was among
 the first to arrive on the scene of calamity, bringing with her Dr.
 Hubbell, the field officer of the Red Cross Association, and a staff
 of skilled assistants. She made her own organization for relief work
 in every form, disposing of the large resources under her control with
 such wisdom and tenderness that the charity of the Red Cross had no
 sting, and its recipients are not Miss Barton’s dependents, but her
 friends. She was also the last of the ministering spirits to leave
 the scene of her labors, and she left her apartment houses for use
 during the winter, and turned over her warehouse, with its store of
 furniture, bedding and clothing and a well-equipped infirmary, to the
 Union Benevolent Association of the Conemaugh Valley, the organization
 of which she advised and helped to form; and its lady visitors have
 so well performed their work that the dreaded winter has no terrors,
 mendicancy has been repressed, and not a single case of unrelieved
 suffering is known to have occurred in all the flooded district.


THE RUSSIAN FAMINE OF 1891-92

 To understand properly the Russian Famine of 1891-92, and the relief
 work of the Red Cross connected therewith, one needs to keep in mind
 the ordinary moral and economic condition of the Russian peasantry.
 They were, many of them, not long ago serfs attached to the land
 in a condition but little better than American slaves. Though the
 liberation of the serfs made their legal condition better, it left
 them in condition scarcely less discouraging than before. They were
 subject to all the disabilities of hard bargains on every side, from
 the exactions of taxes levied in one way or another, and payable
 in services or goods, all of which called for an ever-increasing
 sacrifice. They were subject to onerous military service, and penal
 exactions for violations of the law. These conditions surrounded
 them with an atmosphere of depressing poverty, fear, and hopeless
 endurance, if not of despair. They have not felt the stimulating
 habitual influence of hope, of courage, of enterprise. They are not
 educated to surmount discouragements by overcoming them. Difficulties
 do not down easily before them; they go down before difficulties and
 disasters in something like apathetic despondency, or live in an
 amazing light-hearted, careless recklessness that easily turns to
 drink, to idleness, weakness, disease, and early death. Fear is with
 them always, as if fate was over and against them.

 The climate of Russia is cold in winter, and the means of cooking and
 artificial warmth are scanty, and not easily procured at any time;
 thus, when the famine really came upon them, observers were divided in
 opinion whether the famine, or fear of famine, or of something worse,
 destroyed or paralyzed these people the more.

 The harvest yields of 1889 and 1890 had been much less than an
 average, and at the beginning of 1891 but little of the old supplies
 of grain was left over. The harvest of 1891 was nearly a total
 failure throughout a vast region in central Russia extending from
 Moscow, roughly speaking, say, three hundred miles in a northeasterly
 direction over a plain eight hundred to a thousand miles in width,
 beyond the Ural Mountains, and some distance into Siberia in Asiatic
 Russia--a district of nearly a million square miles. Ordinarily this
 is the most productive part of the Empire, upon which the remainder
 of the country had been accustomed to draw for food supplies in the
 frequent cases of deficiency elsewhere. The appearance of the country
 is similar to our prairie States in the early days before the growth
 of the planted trees; and the soil is a rich, black loam that usually
 produces good harvests.

 It was estimated by those best qualified to judge that from thirty to
 thirty-five millions of people were sufferers by the famine of 1891.

 Count Tolstoy gave up his whole time to mitigating the suffering
 caused by this great disaster, and to understanding the situation
 broadly. He went into the homes of the people, and studied their
 needs sympathetically; he placed himself by their side, and with his
 dramatic instinct understood them, ascertained where the hurt was
 felt, and how it could be cured, if it could be cured at all.

 At that time the Count wrote of these poor unfortunates: “I asked them
 what sort of a harvest they had had, and how they were getting along;
 and they replied in a blithe, offhand manner: ‘Oh, right enough, God
 be praised!’ And yet these people who reside in the most distressed
 districts of the government of Toula, cannot possibly live through
 the winter, _unless they bestir themselves in time_. They are bound
 to die of hunger, or some disease engendered by hunger, as surely as
 a hive of bees left to face the rigors of a northern winter, without
 honey or sweets, must perish miserably before the advent of spring.
 The all-important question, therefore, is this: Will they exert
 themselves while yet they possess the strength, if, indeed, it be not
 already wholly exhausted? Everything that I saw or heard pointed with
 terrible distinctness to a negative reply. One of these farmers had
 sold out the meager possessions which he could call his own, and had
 left for Moscow to work or beg. The others stayed on and waited with
 naïve curiosity watching for what would happen next, like children,
 who, having fallen into a hole in the ice, or lost their way in a
 dense forest and not realizing at first the terrible danger of their
 situation, heartily laugh at its unwontedness.”

 “Unless they bestir themselves in time”--what a text is this! They
 are all the time overborne by the apathy of fear, of unused powers,
 of suppression and depression. Courage, hope, enterprise to bestir
 themselves, where will they come from? Not, surely, from fear and more
 discouragement.

 The work of the American National Red Cross in the Russian famine of
 1891-92 was comparatively less than in some others of the conspicuous
 fields in which it had done its work. The impulse to help in the
 work of that relief sprang up simultaneously in many American hearts
 and homes, in New York, in Philadelphia, in Minnesota, and Iowa.
 In Iowa it took the form of a veritable crusade for a most holy
 cause; beginning in the fervid and indomitable spirit of Miss Alice
 French--the “Octave Thanet” of literature--it quickly enlisted Mr. B.
 F. Tillinghast, editor of the “Davenport Democrat,” who became its
 director-in-chief and organizing force, everywhere organizing it,
 and promoting it in every direction and in every form. The movement
 was taken up by the women of Iowa, and Governor Boies became a prime
 mover, till the whole State at last joined in a triumphal march
 bearing corn, God’s best gift to man, to the Atlantic coast in a
 procession of two hundred and twenty-five carloads, exceeding five
 hundred bushels in each car. The corn was consigned to Clara Barton in
 New York and reached her agents there without accident or delay.

 The American National Red Cross had authentic intelligence of the
 famine in Russia before it had attracted general attention; it had
 placed itself in communication with the Secretary of State, the
 Honorable James G. Blaine, and the Russian Chargé d’Affaires at
 Washington, Mr. Alexander Gregor, and had ascertained that Russia
 would gladly receive any donations of relief that the people of
 America might send to her famine-stricken people. Not only would
 they receive supplies, but would send their ships for them, and
 provide inland transportation from Russian ports to the destitute
 people for whom these benefactions were intended. America declined
 to allow her suffering sister nation to cross the seas to get this
 food, and quickly arranged to carry it to her. All the American
 agencies concerned in this movement met it in the noblest spirit;
 railroad companies gave free transportation, telegraph companies the
 free use of wires, brokers and steamship agents declined their usual
 commissions, and some insurance companies even gave premiums for the
 safe delivery of the precious cargo into the hands of the starving
 people. Funds to charter a steamship to carry the cargo to Russia were
 soon raised and placed in the hands of the Red Cross.

 Dr. Hubbell, representative of the Red Cross to the international
 conference of the Red Cross to be held at Rome, and authorized to
 proceed to Riga and receive and distribute with the Russian Red Cross
 this gift of Iowa, was already on his ocean voyage and ready to do
 his part in this beautiful blending of international courtesies and
 services that it is the mission of the Red Cross to devise and to
 carry out wherever it can make or find the fitting opportunity. Dr.
 Hubbell arrived on time at Riga and superintended the distribution of
 the cargo.


THE SEA ISLANDS HURRICANE OF 1893-94

 It is probable that there are few instances on record where a movement
 toward relief of such magnitude, commenced under circumstances so new,
 so unexpected, so unprepared, and so adverse, was ever carried on for
 such a length of time and closed with results so entirely satisfactory
 to both those served and those serving, as this disaster, which, if
 remembered at all at the present day, is designated as the “Hurricane
 and Tidal Wave of the Sea Islands off the Coast of South Carolina.”
 The descriptions of this fearful catastrophe I shall leave to the
 reports of those who saw, shared its dangers, and lived within its
 tide of death. They will tell how from three thousand to five thousand
 human beings (for no one knew the number) went down in a night; how
 in the blackness of despair they clung to the swaying tree-tops till
 the roots gave way, and together they were covered in the sands or
 washed out to the reckless billows of the great mad ocean that had
 sent for them; of the want, woe, and nothingness that the ensuing
 days revealed when the winds were hushed, the waters stilled, and the
 frightened survivors began to look for the lost home and the loved
 ones, and hunger presaged the gaunt figure of famine that silently
 drew near and stared them in the face; how, with all vegetable growth
 destroyed, all animals, even to fowls, swept away, all fresh water
 turned to salt--not even a sweet well remaining--not one little house
 in five hundred left upright, if left at all; the victims with the
 clothing torn and washed off them, till they were more nearly naked
 than clothed--how these thirty thousand people patiently stood and
 faced this silent second messenger of death threatening them hour by
 hour. Largely ignorant, knowing nothing of the world, with no real
 dependencies upon any section of its people, they could only wait
 its charity, its pity, its rescue, and its care--wait and pray--does
 any one who knows the negro characteristics and attributes doubt
 this latter? Surely, if angels do listen, they heard pleading enough
 in those hours of agony to save even the last man and woman and the
 helpless babe. Something saved them, for there is no record of one who
 died of starvation or perished through lack of care.

 About the 28th or 29th of August, 1893, the press commenced to give
 notice, such as it could get over wrecked roads and broken wires, of
 a fearful storm coming up from the West Indies that had struck our
 coast in the region of South Carolina, sweeping entirely over its
 adjacent range of islands, known as the Old Port Royal group, covering
 them from the sea to a depth of sixteen feet, with the wind at a rate
 of one hundred and twenty miles an hour--that its destructive power
 was so great that it had not only swept the islands, but had extended
 several miles on to the mainland of the State.

 I chanced to be familiar with the geography and topography of that
 group of islands, having lived on them in the capacity of war relief
 many months during the siege of Charleston in 1863-64. Knowing that
 they scarcely averaged four feet rise above the sea level, with no
 mountains, not even hills that could be called such, that the soft,
 sandy soil could not be trusted to hold its tree roots firm, that the
 habitations were only huts, to be washed away like little piles of
 boards--I thought I saw no escape for the inhabitants and that _all_
 must have perished; and so replied to all inquiries at first made as
 to whether this were not a disaster for the Red Cross to relieve,
 “No, there was nothing left to relieve.” Later and more reliable news
 brought the astonishing fact that it was estimated that from thirty to
 forty thousand had survived and were in the direst need. Was not this
 a call for the Red Cross? Still more emphatically, “No; if that is the
 case, it is beyond the Red Cross. Only the State of South Carolina or
 the general Government can cope with that”; and again we closed our
 ears and proceeded with our work.

 But the first week of September brought pitiful paragraphs from
 various Southern sources--one I recall from the governor of the State,
 in which he proclaimed his perplexity and great distress at the
 condition of these poor people, needing everything, and who, at that
 season of the year, with crops all destroyed, would continue to need;
 and closed by wondering “if the Red Cross could perhaps do anything
 for them.”

 It would not do to close our ears or eyes against this suggestion, and
 I at once sought our congressional neighbor, General M. C. Butler, of
 South Carolina, then in the Senate, asking his views. The response
 was such as would not have been looked for in that busy, hard-worked
 Senator, surrounded by a network of political wires, some of them only
 too likely to be “live”; he dropped all business, telegraphed at once
 to Governor Tillman at Columbia to learn the conditions, and urgently
 requested us to go, and he would even leave his seat and go with us
 as soon as we could be ready. Time is never a question with the Red
 Cross, and the next night, in a dark, cheerless September mist, with
 only two assistants, I closed a door behind me for ten months, went to
 the station to meet General Butler, prompt and kind, and proceeded on
 our way. At Columbia we were joyfully surprised at meeting Governor
 Tillman, prepared to accompany us with a member of his staff, and thus
 powerfully reënforced we made our entrance into Beaufort.

 The work of relief had been wisely placed at first in the hands of
 committees from both Beaufort and Charleston, comprising the best
 business men of each city--its lawyers, merchants, bankers, all men of
 prominence and known practical ability. They had done and were doing
 all possible for them to do, with hearts full of pity, hands full of
 work, themselves large losers by the storm, business nearly wrecked,
 and needing every remaining energy for the repairing of their own
 damages and those of the citizens about them.

 The governor, at whose request they had formed, realizing the
 necessities of the case, sought to release them, calling them
 together in each city and successively relieving them, placing the
 Red Cross in full charge of the relief. With the little knowledge we
 had of the conditions and surroundings, it would have been madness to
 accept, at least until both more knowledge and more numerical force
 were gained, and the refusal was as prompt as the proffer had been.
 We, however, promised to remain in Beaufort, meet with the committee
 each day, advise with them, study the situation and report our
 conclusions when we could safely arrive at them.

 Thus we remained until the first day of October, realizing that the
 relief coming in from outside would soon diminish as the excitement
 should wear away, that the sum in hand was painfully small, that the
 number of destitute was steadily increasing, that the winter was
 approaching and that they must be carried through in some manner till
 the next year’s crops could grow; and that, in order to do this a
 fixed system of relief must be adopted, a rigid economy enforced, and
 every person who could do so must be made to work for his food and
 receive food and raiment only in return for labor; that this could
 come only from persons who had no interests but these to subserve
 and with the light of all experience that could be called to the
 task. Even then a successful result was questionable; but there was
 no question of the fatal result of any other course, and after a
 thoughtful council of our official board (which had meanwhile become
 nearly filled) on the night of September 30 it was decided that the
 Red Cross would accept the appointment of the governor and enter upon
 its duties the following day.

 Accordingly, at the meeting of the next day, October 1, 4 P.M., the
 Beaufort Relief Commission, as appointed by the governor, was formally
 released as a committee and immediately reëlected by the Red Cross as
 its “advisory board,” to meet and advise with us as we had done with
 them.

 Through all these years the tenderness springs to my heart and gathers
 in my eyes as I recall the kindly and affectionate intercourse of
 months, without one break, that grew up between us. And although some
 have been called to higher service and greener fields, I am confident
 that none of us will ever seek on this side a better, more trusted,
 kindlier association than were found in these.

 If it be desirable to understand when to commence a work of relief,
 to know if the objects presented are actually such as to be benefited
 by the assistance which would be rendered, it is no less desirable
 and indispensable that one knows when to end such relief, in order to
 avoid, first, the weakening of effort and powers for self-sustenance;
 second, the encouragement of a tendency to beggary and pauperism,
 by dependence upon others which should be assumed by the persons
 themselves. It has always been the practice of the Red Cross to watch
 this matter closely and leave a field at the suitable moment when it
 could do so without injury or unnecessary suffering, thus leaving a
 wholesome stimulus on the part of the beneficiaries to help not only
 themselves individually, but each other.

 Seldom a field, or any considerable work of relief which may have
 attracted public notice, comes to a close that there does not some
 person or body of persons arise and propose to continue the work
 under some new form, but using the former well-established sources of
 supplies; to put out new appeals to old patrons, detailing great need,
 newly discovered, and thus keep the sympathetic public forever on the
 anxious seats of never-ending pity and help. We have been compelled to
 guard against this at the close of every long-continued field, notably
 Johnstown, where it became necessary for the citizens to organize a
 “Home Relief” to keep sensational strangers off the ground, and their
 well-arranged “Benevolent Union” of to-day is the result.

 The Sea Islands were no exception, and at the last moment of our stay
 a well-drawn petition was discovered (for it was to be kept concealed
 until we were gone), and was checked only by the vigorous aid of the
 Charleston “News and Courier,” of June 25, 1894, always our stay and
 friend in time of trouble.


ARMENIA IN 1895 AND 1896

 In November, 1895, the press commenced to warn us of a possible
 call for the relief of the terrible sufferings of Armenia, which
 were engaging the attention of the civilized world. These warnings
 were followed later by a letter from the Reverend Judson Smith,
 D.D., of Boston, secretary of the American Board of Commissioners
 for Foreign Missions, referring his suggestion back to the Reverend
 Henry O. Dwight, D.D., of the American Board of Foreign Missions
 at Constantinople. The American Red Cross was requested by these
 representative gentlemen to undertake the distribution of relief
 funds among the sufferers of Armenia. Owing to the disturbed
 condition of the country and of its strict laws, combined as they
 were with existing racial and religious differences, it was found
 almost impossible at the moment to distribute the relief needed.
 The faithful but distressed resident missionaries were themselves
 helpless sufferers to a great extent and practically prisoners in
 their own houses. These had not always been spared to them in the
 wild excitement which reigned for several months previous, otherwise
 they would have been the normal channels for distributing aid. This
 written request from Dr. Smith was nearly identical with a similar one
 from Mr. Spencer Trask, of New York, who, with others, was about to
 form a National Armenian Relief Committee, to be established in that
 city. Following their letters, both of these gentlemen, Dr. Smith and
 Mr. Trask, came to Washington personally to urge our compliance with
 the request that we accept the charge of this distribution of relief
 funds. Accustomed to the trials, responsibilities, and hardships of
 field relief labor, this proposition seemed something to be shrunk
 from rather than accepted and we naturally hesitated. The idea,
 however, became public, and a general importunity on the part of
 the people became prevalent. The necessity for immediate action was
 urged; human beings were starving and could not be reached, hundreds
 of towns and villages had not been heard from since the fire and
 sword went over them, and no one else was so well prepared for the
 work of field relief, it was said, as ourselves. It was urged that we
 had a trained force of field workers, and as Turkey was one of the
 signatory powers to the Red Cross Treaty of Geneva, having given its
 adhesion as long ago as July, 1865, it must consequently be familiar
 with its methods and humanitarian ideas. Thus it was hoped that she
 would the more readily accept its presence than that of a more strange
 body of workers. These are only a shadowing of the reasons urged on
 behalf of our acceptance. Under this pressure, coupled with our strong
 sympathies, the subject was taken into serious consideration with the
 simple demand on our part of two positive assurances: first, we must
 be assured by the committees that we were the choice of the people of
 the entire country, that there was no opposition to us, and that there
 was perfect unanimity between themselves; there must be nowhere any
 discord; the task would be difficult enough under the best conditions.
 Second, that they had the funds to distribute. Assured on both these
 points, our promise was given that we would go and do our best to make
 the desired distribution in the interior of Asia Minor.

 With this ray of hope that something might be done, the pent-up
 sympathies of the people burst forth. Public meetings were held,
 addresses made, Armenian conditions estimated, horrors reproduced,
 responsibilities placed, causes canvassed, and opinions expressed;
 honest, humane, and entirely natural, precisely the course to rouse
 public sentiment and indignation, if that were the only or the main
 object in view. In consideration, however, of the relief effort, it
 was of questionable wisdom, perhaps, when it is borne in mind that
 we had yet to ask the opening of a door hitherto closed against the
 world, when we needed permission to enter, in order to reach the
 starving sufferers with the relief that was planning for them. In
 the enthusiasm of the hour, this fact seemed to be entirely lost
 sight of. It also seemed to be forgotten that if this difficult and
 delicate task were to be assigned to the Red Cross and its officers,
 the making of their mission, or of themselves personally, prominent
 or laudatory features of public gatherings where Ottoman officials or
 representatives were always listeners, could not fail to render the
 post more difficult and prospects of success more doubtful.

 The international and neutral character of the Red Cross, as a medium
 of relief in mitigation of war or overwhelming calamity, appeared to
 be overlooked or wholly misunderstood. It was not recognized that
 only by abstaining from discordant opinions could we be in a position
 to perform our work. By the obligations of the Geneva Treaty, all
 national controversies, racial distinctions, and differences in creed
 must be held in abeyance and only the needs of humanity considered.
 In this spirit alone can the Red Cross meet its obligations as the
 representative of the nations and governments of the world acting
 under it. But American enthusiasm is boundless, and its expression
 limitless; and the same breath that crushed the Ottoman Empire,
 scattered it to the winds or sunk it in the lowest depths, elevated
 the Red Cross and its proposed relief out of sight among the clouds.
 Precautionary remonstrance from us was in vain, but it was not until
 after we had publicly given our consent, made all arrangements and
 appointed our aids, that the fruits of these ardent demonstrations
 became visible in a pronunciamento through the Turkish Minister
 resident at Washington, prohibiting the Red Cross from entering Turkey.

 I found this decision on the part of the Bey and his Government
 very natural and politically justifiable--our own Government and
 people would probably have done the same or even more under similar
 conditions, provided similar conditions could have existed among them.
 I was ready to abide by the decision and remain at home. This, neither
 people nor committees would consent to. Of course our selected force
 of more than a score of trained and experienced field workers, each
 a specialist, must be given up. If any relief were now attempted it
 could only be individual, with two or three officers from headquarters
 as indispensable aids.

 Previous to the announcement of the Turkish Minister prohibiting the
 Red Cross from entering Turkey, the promise had been gained from
 us to leave by the steamship _New York_ on the 22d of January, and
 notwithstanding the reply to a cablegram from the Department of State
 to Constantinople, asking if the prohibition against the entrance of
 the Red Cross was really official and from the Government itself, or
 but semi-official, had not been received, our promise was kept and we
 sailed with this uncertainty resting over us.

 The picture of that scene is still vivid in my memory. Crowded piers,
 wild with hurrahs, white with parting salutes, hearts beating with
 exultation and expectation--a little shorn band of five, prohibited,
 unsustained either by Government or other authority, destined to a
 port five thousand miles away, from approach to which even the powers
 of the world had shrunk. What was it expected to do or how to do it?
 Visions of Don Quixote and his windmills loomed up, as I turned away
 and wondered.

 A week at sea, to be met at midnight at Southampton, by messenger
 down from London, to say that the prohibition was sustained, the
 Red Cross was forbidden, but that such persons as our minister, Mr.
 Terrell, would appoint, would be received. Here was another delicate
 uncertainty which could not be committed to Ottoman telegraph, and
 Dr. Hubbell was dispatched alone to Constantinople (while we waited
 in London) to learn from Mr. Terrell his attitude toward ourselves
 and our mission. Under favorable responses we proceeded, and reached
 Constantinople on February 15; met a most cordial reception from all
 our own Government officials, and located _pro tem._ at Pera Palace
 Hotel; it being so recently after the Stamboul massacres that no less
 public place was deemed safe.

 The following day we received in a body the members of the Missionary
 Board in Constantinople, including its treasurer, W. W. Peet, and
 Dr. Washburn, president of Robert College, and here commenced
 that friendly intercourse which continued without interruption,
 strengthening as the days wore on through the half-year that followed,
 till moistened eyes and warm hand-grasp at parting told more plainly
 than words how fraught with confidence that intercourse had been. If
 one would look for peers of this accomplished Christian body of our
 countrymen, they would only be found in the noble band of women, who,
 as wives, mothers, and teachers, aid their labors and share their
 hardships, privations, and dangers. I shall always feel it a privilege
 and an honor to have been called, even in a small way, to assist
 the efforts of this chosen body of our countrymen and women, whose
 faithful and devoted lives are made sacred to the service of God and
 their fellow men.

 The first step was to procure an introduction to the Government which
 had in one sense refused me; and accompanied by Minister Terrell and
 his premier interpreter, Gargiulo, perhaps the longest serving and
 one of the most experienced diplomatic officers in Constantinople,
 I called by appointment upon Tewfik Pasha, the Turkish Minister of
 Foreign Affairs or Minister of State. To those conversant with the
 personages connected with Turkish affairs, I need not say that Tewfik
 Pasha is probably the foremost man of the Government; a manly man,
 with a kind, fine face, and genial, polished manners. Educated abroad,
 with advanced views on general subjects, he impresses one as a man who
 would sanction no wrong it was in his power to avert.

 We were received at the Department of State in an uninterrupted
 interview lasting over an hour. As this was the main interview and the
 base of all our work, it is perhaps proper that I give it somewhat
 in detail. Mr. Terrell’s introduction was most appropriate and well
 expressed, bearing with strong emphasis upon the suffering condition
 of the people of the interior in consequence of the massacres, and
 the great sympathy of the people of America, their intense desire to
 help them, the heartfelt interest in their missionaries whose burdens
 were greater than they ought to bear, and the desire to aid them, and
 that for all these reasons we had been asked to come; that our objects
 were purely humanitarian, having neither political, racial, nor
 religious bearing as such; that as the head of the organization thus
 represented I _could_ have no other ideas, and it was the privilege
 of putting these ideas into practice and the protection required
 meanwhile that the people of America, through him and through me, were
 asking.

 The Pasha listened most attentively to the speech of Mr. Terrell,
 thanked him, and replied that this was well understood; that they knew
 the Red Cross and its president, and, turning to me, repeated: “We
 know you, Miss Barton; have long known you and your work. We would
 like to hear your plans for relief and what you desire.”

 I proceeded to state them, bearing fully upon the fact that the
 condition to which the people of the interior of Asia Minor had been
 reduced by recent events had aroused the sympathy of the entire
 American people until they asked, almost to the extent of a demand,
 that assistance from them should be allowed to go directly to these
 sufferers, hundreds of whom had friends and relatives in America--a
 fact which naturally strengthened both the interest and the demand;
 that it was at the request of our people, _en masse_, that I and a
 few assistants had come; that our object would be to use the funds
 ourselves among the people needing them wherever they were found, in
 helping them to resume their former positions and vocations, thus
 relieving them from continued distress, the State from the burden of
 providing for them, and other nations and people from a torrent of
 sympathy which was both hard to endure and unwholesome in its effects;
 that I had brought skilled agents, practical and experienced farmers
 whose first efforts would be to get the people back to their deserted
 fields and provide them with farming implements and material wherewith
 to put in summer crops and thus enable them to feed themselves. These
 would embrace ploughs, hoes, spades, seed-corn, wheat, and, later,
 sickles, scythes, etc., for harvesting, with which to save the miles
 of autumn grain which we had heard of as growing on the great plains
 already in the ground before the trouble; also to provide for them
 such cattle and other animals as it would be possible to purchase or
 to get back; that if some such thing were not done before another
 winter, unless we had been greatly misinformed, the suffering there
 would shock the entire civilized world. None of us knew from personal
 observations, as yet, the full need of assistance, but had reason to
 believe it very great. That if my agents were permitted to go, such
 need as they found they would be prompt to relieve. On the other hand,
 if they did not find the need existing there, none would leave the
 field so gladly as they. There would be no respecting of persons;
 humanity alone would be their guide. “We have,” I added, “brought
 only ourselves, no correspondent has accompanied us, and we shall
 have none, and shall not go home to write a book on Turkey. We are
 not here for that. Nothing shall be done in any concealed manner. All
 dispatches which we send will go openly through your own telegraph,
 and I should be glad if all that we shall write could be seen by your
 Government. I cannot, of course, say what its character will be, but
 can vouch for its truth, fairness, and integrity, and for the conduct
 of every leading man who shall be sent. I shall never counsel nor
 permit a sly or underhand action with your Government, and you will
 pardon me, Pasha, if I say that I shall expect the same treatment in
 return--such as I give I shall expect to receive.”

 Almost without a breath he replied--“And you shall have it. We
 honor your position and your wishes will be respected. Such aid and
 protection as we are able to, we shall render.”

 I then asked if it were necessary for me to see other officials. “No,”
 he replied, “I speak for my Government.” And with cordial good wishes,
 our interview closed.

 I never spoke personally with this gentleman again; all further
 business being officially transacted through the officers of our
 Legation. Yet I can truly say, as I have said of my first meeting
 with our matchless band of missionary workers, that here commenced an
 acquaintance which proved invaluable, and here were given pledges of
 mutual faith of which not a word was ever broken or invalidated on
 either side, and to which I owe what we were able to do through all
 Asia Minor. It is to the strong escorts ordered from the Sublime Porte
 for our expeditions and men that I owe the fact that they all came
 back to me, and that I bring them home to you, tired and worn, but
 saved and useful still.

 Dr. Hubbell and the leaders of the five expeditions tell us that
 they were never, even for a portion of a day, without an escort
 for protection, and this at the expense of the Turkish Government,
 and that without this protection they must not and could not have
 proceeded.

 At length the task was accomplished. One by one the expeditions closed
 and withdrew, returning by Sivas and Samsoun and coming out by the
 Black Sea. By that time it is probable that no one questioned the
 propriety of their route or longer wondered at their method of work.
 The perplexed frowns of our anxious committees and sympathetic people
 had long given way to smiles of confidence and approval, and glad
 hands would have reached far over the waters to meet ours as warmly
 extended to them.

 With the return of the expeditions we closed the field, but before
 leaving Constantinople, funds from both the New York and Boston
 committees came to us amounting to some fifteen thousand dollars.
 This was happily placed with Mr. Peet, treasurer of the Board of
 Foreign Missions at Stamboul, for the building of little houses in
 the interior as a winter shelter and protection where all had been
 destroyed.

 The appearance of our men on their arrival at Constantinople confirmed
 the impression that they had not been recalled too soon. They had gone
 out through the snows and ice of winter and without change or rest
 had come back through the scorching suns of midsummer--five months
 of rough, uncivilized life, faring and sharing with their beasts of
 burden, well-nigh out of communication with the civilized world, but
 never out of danger, it seemed but just to themselves and to others
 who might yet need them that change and rest be given them.

 Since our entrance upon Turkish soil no general disturbance had taken
 place. One heard only the low rumbling of the thunder after the
 storm, the clouds were drifting southward and settling over Crete and
 Macedonia, and we felt that we might take at least some steps toward
 home. It was only when this movement commenced that we began truly to
 realize how deep the roots of friendship, comradeship, confidence, and
 love had struck back among our newly found friends and countrymen;
 how much a part of ourselves--educational, humanitarian, and
 official--their work and interest had become, and surely from them we
 learned anew the lesson of reciprocity.

 Some days of physical rest were needful for the men of the expeditions
 after reaching Constantinople before commencing another journey of
 thousands of miles, worn as they were by exposure, hardship, and
 incessant labor, both physical and mental. This interval of time was,
 however, mainly employed by them in the preparation of the reports
 submitted with this, and in attention to the letters which followed
 them from their various fields, telling of further need, but more
 largely overflowing with gratitude and blessing for what had been done.

 For our financial secretary and myself there could be neither rest nor
 respite while we remained at a disbursing post so well known as ours.
 Indeed there never had been. From the time of our arrival in February
 to our embarkation in August there were but two days not strictly
 devoted to business, the 4th of July and the 5th of August--the last a
 farewell to our friends. For both of these occasions we were indebted
 to the hospitality of treasurer and Mrs. W. W. Peet, and although
 held in the open air, on the crowning point of Proti, one of the
 Princes’ Islands, with the Marmora, Bosporus, and Golden Horn in full
 view, the spires and minarets of Constantinople and Scutari telling
 us of a land we knew little of, with peoples and customs strange and
 incomprehensible to us, still there was no lack of the emblem that
 makes every American at home, and its wavy folds of red, white, and
 blue shaded the tables and flecked the tasteful viands around which
 sat the renowned leaders of the American missionary element of Asia
 Minor.

 Henry O. Dwight, D.D., the accomplished gentleman and diplomatic head,
 who was the first to suggest an appeal to the Red Cross, and I am
 glad to feel he has never repented him of his decision. One fact in
 regard to Dr. Dwight may be of interest to some hundreds of thousands
 of our people. On first meeting him I was not quite sure of the title
 by which to address him, if reverend or doctor, and took the courage
 to ask him. He turned a glance full of amused meaning upon me as he
 replied: “That is of little consequence; the title I prize most is
 _Captain_ Dwight.” “Of what?” I asked. “Company D, Twentieth Ohio
 Volunteers, in our late war.” The recognition which followed can
 well be imagined by the comrades for whose interest I have named the
 incident.

 The Reverend Joseph K. Greene, D.D., and his amiable wife, to whom
 so much is due toward the well-being of the missionary work of
 Constantinople. I regret that I am not able to reproduce the eloquent
 and patriotic remarks of Dr. Greene on both these occasions, so true
 to our country, our government, and our laws. The Reverend George P.
 Knapp, formerly of Bitlis, whose courage no one questions. Mrs. Lee
 of Marash, and Mrs. Dr. George Washburn of Robert College, the worthy
 and efficient daughters of the Reverend Doctor Cyrus Hamlin, the
 veteran missionary and founder of Robert College, living in Lexington,
 Massachusetts. A half-score of teachers, whose grand lives will one
 day grace the pages of religious history. And last, though by no means
 least, our host, the man of few words and much work, who bears the
 burden of monetary relief for the woes and wants of Asia Minor, W. W.
 Peet.

 It was a great satisfaction that most of our field agents were able
 to be present at the last of these beautiful occasions and personally
 render an account of their stewardship to those who had watched
 their course with such interest. The pleasure of these two days of
 recreation will ever remain a golden light in our memories.

 As the first official act of the relief work after our arrival in
 Constantinople was my formal presentation to the Sublime Porte by the
 American Minister, the Honorable A. W. Terrell, diplomatic courtesy
 demanded that I take proper occasion to notify the Turkish Government
 of our departure and return thanks for its assistance, which was done
 formally at “Selamlik,” a religious ceremony held on the Turkish
 Sabbath, which corresponds to our Friday. The Court Chamberlain
 delivered my message to the palace. It was received and responded to
 through the same medium and I took my departure, having finished my
 diplomatic work with that Government which had from first to last
 treated me with respect, assisted my work, and protected my workers.

 To correct certain impressions and expressions which have been
 circulating more or less extensively in this country, and for
 the correct information of the people who through their loyal
 interest deserve to know the facts, I make known my entire social
 relations while residing in Turkey. Personally I did not go beyond
 Constantinople. The proper conduct of our work demanded the continuous
 presence of both our financial secretary and myself at headquarters.
 I never saw, to communicate with personally, any member of the Turkish
 Government excepting its Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tewfik Pasha, as
 named previously. I never spoke with the Sultan and have never seen
 him excepting in his carriage on the way to his mosque.

 On being informed through our Legation that the Turkish Minister at
 Washington, Mavroyeni Bey, had been recalled and that his successor
 was about to leave for his new position, I felt that national
 courtesy required that I call upon him and, attended by a member
 of our Legation, my secretary and myself crossed the Bosporusto,
 a magnificent estate on the Asiatic shore, the palatial home of
 Moustapha Tahsin Bey, a gentleman of culture, who had resided in New
 York in some legal capacity, and who, I feel certain, will be socially
 and officially acceptable to our Government.

 I have received a decoration, officially described as follows:

 Brevet of Chevalier of the Royal Order of Melusine, founded in
 1186, by Sibylle, Queen and spouse of King Guy of Jerusalem, and
 reinstituted several years since by Marie, Princess of Lusignan. The
 Order is conferred for humanitarian, scientific and other services
 of distinction, but especially when such services are rendered to
 the House of Lusignan, and particularly to the Armenian nation. The
 Order is worn by a number of reigning sovereigns, and is highly prized
 by the recipients because of its rare bestowal and its beauty. This
 decoration is bestowed by His Royal Highness, Guy of Lusignan, Prince
 of Jerusalem, Cyprus and Armenia.

Some months after returning home I received through our State
Department at Washington the Sultan’s decoration of Shefaket and its
accompanying diploma in Turkish, a translation of which is here given:

 As Miss Barton, American citizen, possesses many great and
 distinguished qualities and as recompense is due to her, I am pleased
 therefore to accord to her the second class of my decorations of
 Shefaket.


Such were the honors which Miss Barton received from the Turkish
Government. Her American friends in Constantinople were no less
enthusiastic. Among the foremost of American missionaries in Turkey and
those longest resident in Constantinople, the Reverend Doctors Dwight
and Greene deserve to be quoted as expressing the judgment of the
Americans as a body:

From the Reverend Doctor H. O. Dwight, one word among the many so
generously spoken:

 Miss Barton has done a splendid work, sensibly and economically
 managed. Wherever her agents have been, the missionaries have
 expressed the strongest approval of their methods and efficiency. The
 work done has been of great and permanent importance.

From the Reverend Joseph K. Greene, D.D., to the New York “Independent”:

 After some six months of service, Miss Clara Barton and her five able
 assistants have left Constantinople on their return to America. It was
 only on the earnest solicitation of the missionaries, the officers of
 the American Board, and many other friends of the suffering Armenians
 that Miss Barton undertook the relief in this land. The difficulties
 of the work, arising from the suspicions of the Turkish authorities,
 the distance from the capital to the sufferers, the perils and
 discomforts in communicating with them, and from unfamiliarity with
 the languages and customs of the people of the land, would surely
 have appalled a less courageous heart. Under such circumstances it is
 only just and fair that the American public should be apprised of the
 substantial success of this mission of the Red Cross.

 In the first place, Miss Barton has shown a rare faculty in getting on
 well with everybody. To facilitate her work she, and the assistants
 whom she loves to call “my men,” laid aside all the insignia of the
 Red Cross and appeared everywhere simply as private individuals.
 She clearly understood that she could accomplish her mission only
 by securing the confidence and good-will of the authorities, and
 this she did by her patience and repeated explanations, and by the
 assistance of the American Legation. When the _iradé_, or imperial
 decree sanctioning her mission, was delayed, she sent forward her
 assistants with only a traveling permit for a part of the way,
 trusting, and not in vain, that the local authorities, instructed from
 headquarters, would facilitate their way. As a matter of fact, while
 Mr. Pullman, her secretary and treasurer, remained at Constantinople
 with Miss Barton, her distributing agents, namely, Dr. Hubbell and Mr.
 Mason, Mr. Wistar and Mr. Wood, either together or in two parties,
 traveled inland from Alexandretta to Killis, Aintab, Marash, Zeitoun,
 Birejik, Oorfa, Diarbekir, Farkin, Harpoot, Palou, Malatia, Arabkir,
 Egin, Sivas, Tokat, Samsoun, and back to Constantinople without
 interruption or molestation. They were readily and constantly supplied
 with guards, and could not with safety have made their perilous four
 months’ journey without them. Demands are said to have been made that
 the distribution of aid be made under the supervision of Government
 officials, but, in fact, Miss Barton’s agents knew how to make
 their distributions in every place, after careful consultation and
 examination, without any interference on the part of the authorities.

 Miss Barton received in all about $116,000, and an unexpended balance
 of $15,400 was committed to Mr. Peet, the treasurer of the American
 Missions in Turkey, to be held as an emergency fund, subject to Miss
 Barton’s orders. No expense has been incurred for Miss Barton or her
 agents save for traveling expenses and the wages of interpreters,
 and with this exception the entire sum expended has gone to the
 actual relief of the sufferers. While the fund committed to the
 Anglo-American Committee, of which Mr. Peet is a member--a sum four
 to five times the amount committed to Miss Barton--has been expended
 through the missionaries, largely to save the hungry from starvation,
 the relief through the agents of the Red Cross has for the most part
 been wisely devoted to the putting of the poor sufferers on their feet
 again, and thus helping them to help themselves. Some five hundred
 liras (a lira is $4.40 of _good_ money) were given for the cure and
 care of the sick in Marash, Zeitoun, and elsewhere, and some two
 thousand liras’ worth of cloths, thread, pins and needles were sent
 inland; but many times this amount was expended in providing material
 for poor widows; seeds, agricultural implements and oxen for farmers;
 tools for blacksmiths and carpenters; and looms for weavers. In some
 places Miss Barton’s agents had the pleasure of seeing vegetable
 gardens coming forward from seed furnished by the Red Cross, and
 village farmers reaping the grain with sickles which the Red Cross had
 given. The great want now--a want which the funds of the Red Cross
 agents did not permit them to any large extent to meet--is aid to the
 poor villagers to help them rebuild their burned and ruined houses,
 and thus provide for themselves shelter against the rigors of the
 coming winter. The Red Cross agents have, however, gathered a great
 stock of information; and passing by the horrors of the massacres
 and the awful abuse of girls and women, as unimpeachable witnesses
 they can bear testimony to the frightful sufferings and needs of the
 people. We most sincerely hope and pray that Miss Barton and the
 agents and friends of the Red Cross will not esteem their work in
 Turkey done, but knowing now so well just what remains to be done,
 and what can be done, will bend every effort to secure further relief
 for the widows and orphans of the more than sixty thousand murdered
 men--mostly between the ages of eighteen and fifty--whose lives no
 earthly arm was outstretched to save.

 While we gratefully bear witness to the wise and indefatigable efforts
 of Miss Barton’s _agents_, permit us to add that during her more
 than six months’ stay in Constantinople Miss Barton gave _herself_
 unremittingly to the work of her mission. She seems to have had no
 time for sight-seeing, and not a few of her friends are disposed to
 complain that she had no time to accept the invitations of those
 who would have been glad to entertain her. The only relaxation she
 seems to have given herself was on two occasions--the first, a
 Fourth of July picnic with a few American friends, on one of the
 Princes’ Islands, and the second, another picnic on the same island,
 on Wednesday, August 5, when, with three of her “men,” she met some
 twenty American lady teachers and missionaries, in order to bid them a
 courteous farewell. The first occasion she unqualifiedly declared to
 have been the happiest Fourth of July she had ever had; and inspired
 by the occasion, she penned some verses which she kindly read to
 her friends on the second gathering, and which we very much wish
 she would permit the editor of the “Independent” to publish. On the
 second occasion, at Miss Barton’s request, the financial secretary
 read his report and Dr. Hubbell and Mr. Wood presented reports of the
 work of distribution. We gratefully acknowledged the honor done us
 in permitting us to hear these reports; and, remembering our
 concern for Miss Barton while preparing for the work of distribution
 six months ago, we gladly expressed our joy and congratulations now on
 the happy return of her faithful and efficient agents, of whom it may
 be truly said that they went and saw and conquered. We rejoiced that
 these new friends had come to know so well the American missionaries
 in Turkey, and were truly thankful for a mutually happy acquaintance.
 We wished Miss Barton and her “men” a hearty welcome on their arrival,
 and, now, with all our hearts, we wish them God-speed on their return
 home.

Miss Barton was already much bedecorated before the formation of
the American Red Cross, but she brought back from Turkey additional
official decorations presented to her by the Turkish Government and by
prominent organizations represented by the Armenians.

[Illustration: DECORATIONS OF CLARA BARTON

 1. “Gold Masonic Emblem,” given her by her father and worn by Miss
 Clara Barton through the Civil War, 1861-1865.

 2. “The German official Red Cross Field Badge,” presented by the Grand
 Duchess of Baden, and worn by Miss Barton through the Franco-Prussian
 War, 1870-1871.

 3. “The Iron Cross of Germany,” conferred by Emperor William I and
 Empress Augusta, 1871, in recognition of Miss Barton’s services for
 humanity in the Franco-Prussian War.

 4. “The Gold Cross of Remembrance,” conferred by the Grand Duke and
 Grand Duchess of Baden, 1871.

 5. “Royal Jewel” (gold-knot brooch), presented by the Grand Duchess
 of Baden, 1897. When presenting this brooch to Miss Barton the Grand
 Duchess said, “An unbroken friendship of twenty-six years deserves to
 be tied by a knot of gold.”

 6. The official medal of the “International Red Cross,” presented to
 Miss Barton when through her efforts the Congress of the United States
 adopted the treaty of Geneva in 1882. Presented by the International
 Committee of Geneva.

 7. Serbian decoration (silver, red enamel, and silver center),
 conferred by Queen Nathalie of Serbia, 1883, for services for humanity.

 8. Gold badge of the “Waffengenosen” German soldiers in America who
 took part in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871, presented to their
 Honorary Member Miss Barton in 1885.

 9. Silver Medal conferred by Augusta, Empress of Germany, 1885.

 10. “Grand Army and Woman’s Relief Corps” (gold with diamonds),
 presented to Miss Barton, the sole Honorary Member of the Relief
 Corps, 1886.

 11. Royal Jewel (brooch, smoky topaz surrounded with pearls),
 presented by the Grand Duchess of Baden, 1887.

 12. Royal Jewel (red topaz and gold brooch), presented by the Empress
 Augusta of Germany, 1887.

 13. Silver medal of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics
 Association, presented in 1887.

 14. Gold brooch with diamonds and sapphire setting, presented by the
 ladies of Johnstown, Pa., at the close of the relief work of the
 Johnstown flood, 1889.

 15. Gold badge of the “Sorosis,” New York, presented to Miss Barton,
 their Honorary Member, 1890.

 16. Gold badge of “The Clara Barton Lodge of the Sisters of the G. A.
 R. of Gloucester, Mass.,” presented to Miss Barton, their Honorary
 Member, 1890.

 17. Badge of the Loyal Legion of Women of Washington, D.C., presented
 to their Honorary Member Miss Barton, 1893.

 20. Gold Medal of the Vanderbilt Benevolent Association of South
 Carolina, presented to Miss Barton, their Honorary Member, 1894.

 21. Red Cross Insignia (silver and red enamel with diamond star), in
 commemoration of the American Relief Field, 1896, presented by Miss
 Barton’s Assistants on the field in memory of the Relief Field of
 Armenia.

 22. Armenian Decoration (silver, blue enamel, and gold), bestowed by
 His Royal Highness Guy de Lusignan, Prince of Jerusalem, Cyprus, and
 Armenia, 1896, in recognition of services in relief of the Armenian
 massacres.

 23. The gold badge of the War Veterans and Sons Association of
 Brooklyn, New York, presented to their Honorary Member Clara Barton,
 April, 1899.

 24. Turkish Decoration (gold, diamonds, and other jewels), conferred
 by the Sultan Abdul Hamid in 1897 through the State Department, with
 the request that if America desired to send further relief to his
 domains, she should send back the missionaries of humanity she sent
 before.

 25. Spanish Decoration of Honor (gold and green enamel), conferred in
 1898 by the Spanish Government.

 26. Belgian Decoration (silver and red enamel), conferred in 1892 by
 the Red Cross of Belgium.

 27. Russian Decoration (silver and red enamel), conferred by the Czar
 Nicholas in 1902. Russian famine.]

The foregoing outline briefly summarizes the work of Miss Barton and of
the American Red Cross in the years following its official recognition
and preceding the Spanish-American War. It was a glorious record; it
gave to the Red Cross a definition in the mind of America, and a place
in the admiration of the world, such as no philanthropic organization
ever had attained. It brought to Clara Barton honors which she accepted
with modesty and quietly laid away while she devoted herself to
preparation for the next field of service.

The work of the Red Cross was now a labor that occupied the whole
twelve months. Her salaried force was small; the expense of
administration was kept low. She maintained a skeleton organization
with a stock of supplies such as did not deteriorate by storage and
was certain to be needed when the first news of disaster arrived. She
did not employ a large force of idle helpers. She depended upon the
emergency bringing its own troop of assistants who worked under her
direction and the direction of those whom she had trained.

Clara Barton knew what not all philanthropists know that it is as
important for a philanthropic organization to get out when its work
is done as it is for it to go in when its work is needed. In almost
every field she met with requests for the continuance of the work after
she knew that the time had come for the people to rely upon their own
resources. She was determined that the Red Cross should never become a
pauperizing institution or furnish employment for an army of official
idlers.




CHAPTER XIII

CLARA BARTON AT HOME AND ABROAD


Strenuous were the years of Miss Barton’s administration of the
American Red Cross. There was upon an average practically one disaster
a year which called her organization into the field. In some instances
the active work of the Red Cross upon the ground lasted only a few
weeks; in other cases, as in the matter of the South Carolina Sea
Islands, it consumed almost a year. The intervals between disasters
were occupied by correspondence, addresses, articles for the press,
and attendance to the many duties brought on by a widened acquaintance
and a constantly growing interest in the work. They were years, too,
in which Miss Barton was sometimes personally short of money. In no
other period, as in this, do her diaries so clearly show the necessity
which she felt for personal economy for the sake of the work. She
declined the four-thousand-dollar salary which was suggested for her;
she vetoed every proposal looking toward a Government appropriation for
her personal benefit or for the work of the Red Cross. If during this
long period she ever thought of the Red Cross in terms of a possible
financial advantage to herself, her diaries betray no hint of it. If
she ever thought of the possibility that Congress might take care of
her, the innumerable letters which passed between her and the members
of the two houses of Congress afford no indication of it.

The adhesion of the United States to the Treaty of Geneva did,
however, take her abroad a number of times, once or more at Government
expense, as one of the three official representatives of the United
States at certain international congresses. The appropriations to
cover the expenses of a delegate were never very large; generally two
thousand dollars for the expense of three delegates. In connection
with one of these journeys an interesting correspondence developed in
which one of the delegates exceeded in expenditure his none too ample
allowance of less than seven hundred dollars. He wrote a long letter
explaining why it had been necessary for him to expend more, and
desired Clara Barton to approve his request for an increase. This she
declined to do either for herself or for either of the others. For her
simple tastes the appropriation was ample; she lived within it and her
associates had to do the same or make up the balance out of their own
pockets.

Miss Barton had just returned from her arduous labor on behalf of the
flood sufferers on the Ohio and Mississippi in the summer of 1884,
when Secretary of State Frelinghuysen appointed her one of the three
delegates to the International Conference at Geneva. Her associates
were her friends Judge Joseph Sheldon, of Connecticut, and Mr. A. S.
Sullivan, vice-president of the American Red Cross.

Miss Barton was so wearied with her labors in connection with the flood
sufferers that she hesitated about accepting her appointment. To her
great joy and to that of Dr. Hubbell, who accompanied her, the voyage
proved an excellent tonic. There was not an unpleasant day, and Miss
Barton was not ill an hour and did not miss a meal. Toward the close
of the voyage she was called upon to address the passengers, who
greeted her with great interest and listened to her with marked and
reverent attention. She reached Liverpool on August 26, 1884, and had a
happy and prosperous journey to Geneva where the Congress convened in
December.

Four hundred distinguished delegates and representatives of the
signatory powers to the treaty assembled at Geneva. There were titled
rulers, distinguished representatives of nobility, eminent surgeons,
noted scientists, and philanthropists whose names were known around the
world.

It is not too much to say that Clara Barton was the most noted delegate
to that convention and the recipient of its highest honors. There was
not one among the four hundred delegates who did not know that it was
she who brought the United States, last of all the great nations, to
occupy a place in that gathering. Popular interest centered about her;
she was pointed out and sought out as the most celebrated delegate to
the congress. Not all of her associates were strangers to her; chief
among the royal persons present to claim the honor of her acquaintance
and introduce her as their friend were the Grand Duke of Baden, the
Grand Duchess, and her imperial father, the Emperor of Germany.

It was the direct influence of Miss Barton which caused the
introduction of what is known as the “America Amendment.” This
amendment was to the effect--

 That the Red Cross Society engage in time of peace in humanitarian
 work analogous to the duties devolving upon them in periods of war,
 such as taking care of the sick and rendering relief in extraordinary
 calamities where, as in war, prompt and organized relief is demanded.

The adoption of this resolution was a high compliment to Clara Barton.
She brought to the congress not only the prestige of America’s
accession to the treaty, but a new and notable enlargement of the
sphere of Red Cross activity which she had invented, tested, and found
practicable in America, and worthy of recommendation to all the world.

At Geneva she was joined by Antoinette Margot, whom she sent for as
a companion and interpreter. For, though Clara Barton was fairly at
home in conversation in French, she was glad of assistance at times.
Antoinette had written her in the years of their separation. Her own
life had been none too happy, and she had passed through a religious
crisis that led her, though born a Protestant, into the Roman Catholic
Church, and later into a cloister. Even this change she credited to
Clara Barton! This amused Clara, but Antoinette said that but for Clara
she would have remained “a crushed-down little unhappy baby in my
father’s house”; Clara had given her courage and strength to face great
questions and decide them:

 Dear, dear Miss Barton [she wrote]: Never, never I shall forget what
 I owe to you. I owe you even my perfect actual happiness of being
 a Catholic, for, without your strong teaching, and your nerving of
 my heart, I could never have dared to take the step of following my
 convictions, when I had convictions to follow.

Clara’s comment was:

 Poor, simple child! It is all for the best, I think. Hers is one of
 those unsteady, unbalanced minds that must be controlled. She has no
 mastery over herself, and nothing but a priest and a confessional can
 make her happy.

Antoinette poured out her impulsive love in extravagant protestations
of devotion. She wanted to see Miss Barton, to kiss the feet of the
woman who had done so much for her, and who stood in the mind of
Antoinette as the realization of the noblest ideal of womanhood.

We owe to this impulsive girl, who later entered a convent, a really
fine description of Clara Barton as she stood among the representatives
of all the nations that were joined in the league of the Red Cross at
Geneva:

 The Government of the United States has done itself no greater credit
 than in selecting Clara Barton to represent it among the nations
 abroad. During the last week I have looked on as she has sat day by
 day in one of the greatest and grandest assemblies of men that could
 be gathered--men representing the highest rank among the civilized
 nations of the earth; men of thought, of wisdom, of power, called
 together from all over the world to deliberate on great questions, of
 nautical import, military power, the neutrality of nations, humanity
 in war, wisdom in peace. In the midst of this assembly of gray-haired
 men, glittering with military decorations, with national honors, won
 and conferred, sat this one woman--calm, thoughtful, self-possessed,
 recognized and acknowledged as possessing every right and privilege
 belonging to any member of the conference; not merely permitted to be
 there, but there by the sovereign right of nations; not merely allowed
 to sit there by the courtesy due to a lady, but by the right due to a
 nation’s representative; her vote not merely accepted as a matter of
 form, but expected and watched for; grave questions referred to her
 as the representative of a great nation, and all deference paid to
 her judgment: her demeanor so unobtrusive, her actions so wise, that
 it could not otherwise than reflect merited credit upon her and her
 country.

 But the crowning recognition of her philanthropic labors at home and
 abroad was given when one of the Italian delegates, springing upon the
 platform, proposed to the assemblage to vote, by acclamation, that
 “_Mademoiselle Barton bien mérite de l’humanité_”.

 Even Miss Barton was moved from her usual composure by the thunders
 of applause. I do not know whether you in America are familiar with
 the peculiar significance of that phrase. It is an expression of the
 highest approbation, honor, and esteem that the French language can
 convey. It is probable that Miss Barton is the first woman in the
 world who has ever received such a tribute.

After her return from Geneva, Miss Barton made a journey to California,
in 1886, returning by way of Charleston, South Carolina, where she had
a share in the relief of that city after the earthquake.

In September, 1887, occurred another international congress of the Red
Cross. This was held in Germany, at Carlsruhe, the ducal capital of
Alsace and home of the Grand Duchess Louise. Here she met her friends,
the Grand Duke and Duchess of Baden and the Emperor of Germany, and
besides these the Empress Augusta, Bismarck, and von Moltke. Her honors
here were scarcely less brilliant than they had been at Geneva, and her
personal joys were more, for she was near the scenes of her labors in
the Franco-Prussian War. There she was the guest of royalty; crowned
heads bowed respectfully to her. From Baden Baden she wrote a letter
home just after the close of the congress:

  BADEN BADEN, GERMANY, Oct. 28, 1887

 The International Red Cross Conference has closed. Most of the
 delegates have left Carlsruhe, unless, like ourselves, remaining
 for after-work. The Grand Duke and Grand Duchess, with their Court,
 have retired to Baden Baden for the customary birthday festivities
 of Her Majesty the Empress, and the Emperor and his suite would, as
 also customary, make his yearly visit in honor of the occasion, thus
 making that lovely and historic old town for the moment, the center of
 interest for the Empire.

 Dr. H. and myself were at breakfast when the hotel porter laid a
 telegraphic dispatch on my plate. It will be remembered, at least
 by personal friends, that three years ago, while in attendance at a
 similar international conference, the honored pleasure of a meeting
 with His Majesty the Emperor of Germany had been given me. This
 dispatch informed me that a like honor again awaited my presence in
 Baden Baden. Trunks were packed, adieus made, and the midday train of
 the following day took us in time for the appointed hour. Whoever has
 visited the interior of the “New Castle,” the Baden Baden palace of
 the Grand Duke, and been shown through its tasteful apartments, rich
 in elegance, tradition, and history, will require no further reminder
 of the _place_ where the interview would be given.

 This was, as well, the birthday of the Crown Prince; and in tender
 paternal sympathy, for the painful affliction resting upon a life so
 treasured, and for the great anxiety of the German people, His Majesty
 the Emperor would pass a portion of the day with the beloved daughter
 and sister, the Grand Duchess, at the castle; and in honoring memory
 of the occasion, its halls were thronged with visitors who came to
 manifest both respect and sympathy.

 At half-past one o’clock we were ushered in at the great castle
 doors, by their attendants in livery of “scarlet and gold,” the
 national colors of Baden; our damp wraps removed--for it was a
 pouring rain--and after a half-hour sitting by a cheerful fire, among
 pictures which quite called one out of personal consciousness, we were
 escorted to the grand reception and drawing room, to the center of a
 magnificent apartment with no occupant but ourselves. By another door
 one saw the Emperor surrounded by guests, who paid formal respects.
 Scores of visitors with coachmen in richest livery had entered while
 we waited and registered titled names on the open pages.

 At length His Majesty turned from the group about him, and, taking
 the arm of the Grand Duchess, entered our apartment. It was difficult
 to realize all the ninety years, as he stepped toward us with even,
 and steady, if no longer elastic, tread. He approached with cordially
 extended hand, and in his excellent French expressed satisfaction for
 the meeting. “In the name of humanity, he was glad to meet and welcome
 those who labored for it.”

 In recalling the earlier days of our acquaintance, Her Royal Highness
 the Grand Duchess alluded tenderly to the winter in Strassburg of
 ’70 and ’71,--which I had passed among its poor and wounded people
 after the siege,--and, selecting two from a cluster of decorations
 which I had worn in honor of the present occasion, drew the attention
 of the Emperor to them. The one he knew; it was his own, presented
 upon his seventy-fifth birthday. The other he had never seen. It was
 the beautiful decoration of the “German Waffengenossen”--the “Warrior
 Brothers in arms” of Milwaukee.

 It was puzzlingly familiar, and yet it was not familiar. There was
 again the Iron Cross of Germany, but it was on the American shield.
 The “American Eagle” surmounting the arms for defense; and the colors
 of Germany, the red, white, and black of the Empire uniting the two.
 His Majesty gazed upon the expressive emblem, which, with no words,
 said so much, and turned inquiringly to the Grand Duchess, as if to
 ask, “Does my daughter understand this?”

 The explanation was made that it was from His Majesty’s own soldiers,
 who, after the “German-Franco War,” had gone to the United States and
 become citizens; and this device was designed to express, that, as by
 its shield they were American citizens, and true to the land of their
 adoption, so by its “Iron Cross,” they were still German; and by the
 colors of the native land for which every man had offered his life,
 and risked it, they bound the old home to the new; and by the American
 Eagle and arms, surmounting all, they were ready to offer their lives
 again, if need be, in defense of either land.

 The smile of the grand old Emperor, as he listened, had in it the
 “Well done” of the benignant father to a dutiful and successful son.
 “And they make good citizens?” he would ask. “The best that could be
 desired,” I said; “industrious, honest, and prosperous, and, sire,
 they are still yours in heart, still true to the Fatherland and its
 Emperor.”

 “I am glad to hear this; they were good soldiers, and thank God, true
 men everywhere,” was the earnest and royal response.

 His Majesty continued, speaking of America, its growth, its progress,
 its advancement in science and humanity, its adoption and work of the
 Red Cross, which meant so much for mankind; and when assured that its
 people revered and loved the Emperor of Germany, that his life was
 precious to them, and that thousands of prayers went up for him in
 that distant land he had never seen, the touching and characteristic
 response betrayed the first tremor of the voice the ear had caught in
 its kindly tones.

 “God be praised for this; for it is all from Him. I am only His. Of
 myself I am nothing. He made us what we are. God is over all.”

 We stood with bowed heads while those slowly spoken, earnest, holy
 words from that most revered of earthly monarchs fell upon us like a
 benediction.

 At length His Majesty gave a hand to both Dr. H. and myself in a
 parting adieu, and walked a few steps away, when turning back, and
 again extending a hand, said, in French, “It is probably the last
 time,” and in pleasant English, “Good-bye.” And again taking the arm
 of the Grand Duchess walked from the room, leaving His Highness the
 Grand Duke, one of the kindest and noblest types of manhood, to say
 the last words, and close the interview; one of the most impressive
 and memorable of a lifetime.

In another letter she told of her parting with the imperial party as
follows:

  BADEN BADEN, Oct. 24, 1887

 I do not know if I have written since coming here or if my last was
 from Carlsruhe. We were here for the “Baden season.” We were invited
 by the Duke and Duchess to spend a few weeks at Baden Baden, and of
 course all the Court proper would come. The Empress came also; and
 the Emperor. They will be here till next Friday, when she goes to
 Berlin. The Crown Prince’s health is very poor. The Emperor is better
 than ever--bright and cheerful like a young man. We went the other
 evening to see him take the train for Berlin. The station reserve
 rooms were like a drawing-room and all the Court and royal persons
 were in them, to wait the coming of the Emperor, and the town. The
 Emperor shook hands with all, saying good-bye, made pretty gifts to
 some special persons, then entered the royal train, to ride all night.
 The day before yesterday the Empress sent for me to come to her. I
 spent a most delightful hour. She had a great deal to say, and made me
 a lovely parting gift of a ruby brooch. She insisted that we should
 meet again, that I should come to Europe again, and she should see
 me. In the P.M. the Grand Duchess sent for us to go to her and we
 went and spent two lovely hours. She is charming as ever. Then next
 evening (last evening) she sent for us to come to dine. We went and
 had a beautiful time. We are to go again to-morrow for a visit. After
 the end of this week we go to Strassburg to spend a little time. Shall
 most likely go to Berlin and back to Strassburg and down the French
 side of the Rhine to Basle, Bern, Geneva, Paris, London, Liverpool,
 and then we shall be on our direct way home, but it is some little
 time yet before we can go home.

From her journey to attend that international congress at Carlsruhe
she returned in January, 1888, and was quickly called away to Mount
Vernon, Illinois, to care for the sufferers from the tornado. When
she returned from this campaign, she went on a short tour delivering
addresses before influential bodies. She spoke in Montclair, New
Jersey, addressing a State conference of Congregational churches. She
then delivered a lecture in Philadelphia, and was received with every
consideration and honor. Then she went home to Washington and did her
washing. This combination of her work as a world leader and a woman
concerned with domestic affairs is contained in two letters to Mrs.
Stafford, dated May 4 and May 8, 1888:

  DEAREST MAMIE:

 I had intended to write you just a line on the train to and from
 Philadelphia, but one was in the night--the other so full of other
 things and the trip so short, I did not get to it.

 I can’t think it was a week ago, but so it seems. The first day I
 met the Society on its Annual Meeting, and spoke to them a little.
 I attended a lunch party before the meeting and a reception after
 the opera at the elegant residence of Dr. ----, president of the
 Philadelphia Red Cross. That made four things after twelve o’clock.

 The next day we had informal meetings with officers of the society
 until two o’clock P.M. Then attended a lecture given in the regular
 course of the Red Cross Society. Then I gave a lecture. Then home to
 dress for the reception to commence at eight.

 This was given in Union League Hall, very large, with a band of music.
 The dignitaries of the city attended in bodies. The physicians--the
 clergymen--the lawyers--the judges--the military army and navy in
 uniform. I received and shook hands with all. They left after eleven.
 It was a splendid reception. There was still a meeting at the hotel
 (The Colonnade) after our return, so we are only in bed by two o’clock
 next morning, got a hasty breakfast and hastened to the nine o’clock
 train for home; found a large mail, and I was very sleepy. I did sleep
 a day or two mainly, and that is what makes the week seem so short, I
 think.

 Then just think what a washing there was on hand; had never had time
 to have a full wash done since our return from Mount Vernon. The
 Woman’s Council came directly on that, and an address to write for
 it. Then the conference of churches at Montclair, and another address
 to write. Then Philadelphia, and another address to write, with all
 that came between. The wash went to the wall till this week, when it
 was taken up in its turn and put through in one day, and all ironed
 yesterday, and clothes put away this very minute, and I haven’t left
 the warehouse yet, but am just dropped down at the table in front
 of the window, near the store (Gaby will know all about it) while
 Alfred brings compost from the stable alongside ready to make up some
 flower-beds, etc., and I direct him from the window as I scribble, to
 lose no time. It is just as lovely as it can be. Tell Gaby we have
 moved the rosebushes all down to the front of the yard, and they
 didn’t mind it a bit, and went right on putting out buds, and he will
 appreciate how much better chance we had with a washing of twenty
 sheets, thirty pillowslips, and other things in proportion, and he
 knows how quickly and easily it all went out of the way, and no one
 got much tired, and not any sick.

 I haven’t time for more than a word. We are making out our foreign
 conference accounts for the Government and I have the report to make
 out directly and a bill to draw up for Congress this next week and a
 host of correspondence, and we are having Alfred make up our garden,
 in front of the warehouse, and a pretty little plot it is too. I
 found time one night by moonlight to plant lettuce and peppergrass
 and radishes, and in two days they come up and are green and pretty.
 Yesterday we set out two dozen tomato plants a foot high, and all
 of our dozen grapevines are growing; splendid varieties; and when
 Alfred makes up the flower-beds to-day, we shall find time to plant
 all the seeds I have. I have no bulbs to set, but I have a dozen nice
 hollyhocks, fifteen inches high, and all the rosebushes and fleur de
 lys in bloom and bud. I can’t get time to hunt over the house for the
 little seeds we want to plant. I have nice seeds for kitchen-garden
 things from Dansville, but can’t remember where to look for them. I
 want a pinch of caraway seed and twelve great sage roots and I want
 some catnip seed for Tommy. There is not a stalk of catnip anywhere
 about, and I can’t get any seed. Have you some in your catnip herb
 bag? I like saffran, and red balm such as Julian raises; I can
 get plenty of elegant plants, but the old, old things are hard to
 find--and I have not time to look, but should so like to stick a few
 out in my nice beds. So here is a place for small contributions. I do
 hope Johny is better. Please give him all the love I can send, and
 try, all of you, to keep well. We are well, the Saturday work is all
 done up, and everything is lovely as spring can make it.

 The great “Council of Women” is now over [she writes a little later]:
 the meetings are ended, the people are mainly leaving the city, and
 this hour my house has had its last visitor. Every day till now my
 space, and my table, has been filled to the utmost, and in addition to
 my full part in the “Council,” its meeting, committees, and speeches.

 The next morning (yesterday) I had to meet a Senate committee at the
 Capitol and address them at ten o’clock. Then I go with Mrs. General
 Logan and others to the War Department to manage business there. And
 now it is eight-thirty the next morning, and at ten I must be at the
 War Department with another committee.

Her domestic affairs attended to, she hurried to Boston to deliver
an important address and attend a reception. From there she went to
Wellesley and delivered an address:

 My cold entirely left me, and I have had no trouble with it. So much
 for right living, and good cool blood. This is the last day of the
 convention. I am to speak to-night. I did say a little yesterday,
 and they all laughed at me; I wish you could have been here. There
 is to be a reception given me next Friday evening. Steve and Lizzie
 and Myrtie are invited. I go to the Wellesley College to take tea and
 speak to the five hundred girls there on Saturday evening. Some things
 I must miss. I get back as soon as I can, so as to go on home. I am so
 glad of Sunday; it was a glorious day; so good to see so many together
 again. I hope the children are well, that you don’t wrestle too much
 with imaginary dirt, and are getting a little real strength.

Besides her tours abroad she had some interesting journeys in her own
country, including a happy camping trip in the Yellowstone Park and the
Cascade Mountains, in the autumn of 1891.

The following winter she spent in the Red Cross Headquarters in what
had been the home of General Grant in Washington. It was a strenuous
winter and an expensive one. She drew upon her personal resources for
fuel for the large building, as well as for rent and the care of the
home. She wrote to Mrs. Bullock:

  17 EAST F STREET, WASHINGTON
  January 7, 1892

 I have wanted to talk with you about coming to see us, but when I
 think how cold it is here, and how far from nice and cozy it is, I
 feel reluctant to invite you from a small, snug, pretty home, to this
 so large and, as it seems to me, less inviting one. If you did not
 know it, I should not dare to say you might try it, for we are having
 an exceptionally cold, hard winter. The ground is covered with snow,
 and the winds have blown an old northeaster these last days, and you
 will know this is not an easy house to heat. My expenses have been
 so heavy, and receipts so “nothing,” that I cannot afford to take on
 more help. I am obliged to have a woman for the work and the house,
 a man for the fires and walk,--shoveling snow and all the cold rough
 work,--and an amanuensis as my clerk and typewriter. They are drawing
 steadily every month; then my rent is high and no one to help share
 that, and, besides this, all the world expects me to give it something
 if it can get through the door and get a letter to me. I have had to
 economize on myself.

In 1893 she was led into an experiment which caused her much anxiety
and proved to have been a mistake. A man and his wife, who had been
associated with her in her work along the Ohio River, expressed a
desire to dedicate, as a thank offering to humanity, a tract of land
more than one square mile in area, or specifically seven hundred
and eighty-two acres, as a home for the American Red Cross. This
offer deeply touched Miss Barton, who accepted it in the following
appreciative letter addressed to the donors:

  AMERICAN NATIONAL RED CROSS
  WASHINGTON, D.C., March 18, 1893

 DEAR SIR: Referring to your letter of February 10th, made public
 February 23d, permit me to reply as follows:

 In accepting the gift of land, in the State of Indiana, that you so
 generously dedicate to the American National Red Cross as “the almoner
 of humanity,” and by which you have so touchingly complimented me
 personally, allow me to say that the friendship expressed on this
 and many other occasions by yourself and wife, and the personal aid
 you have both given of time and labor in great calamities, make me
 free to accept this gift without reservation, assuring you of my best
 endeavors to attain the humane results for which this benefaction is
 intended.

 This land, as the property of the American National Red Cross, will be
 the one piece of neutral ground on the Western Hemisphere protected
 by international treaty against the tread of hostile feet. It is a
 perpetual sanctuary against invading armies, and will be so respected
 and held sacred by the military powers of the world. Forty nations are
 pledged to hold all material and stores of the Red Cross, and all its
 followers, neutral in war, and free to go and come as their duties
 require.

 While its business headquarters will remain, as before, at the capital
 of the Nation, this gift still forms a realization of the hope so long
 cherished--that the National Red Cross may have a place to accumulate
 and produce material and stores for sudden emergencies and great
 calamities; and if war should come upon our land, which may God avert,
 we may be ready to fulfil the mission that our adhesion to the Geneva
 Treaty has made binding upon us.

 I will direct that monuments be erected defining the boundaries of
 this domain, dedicated to eternal peace and humanity, upon which shall
 be inscribed the insignia of the Treaty of Geneva, which insignia all
 the nations of the earth are bound by solemn covenant to respect.

 Not only our own people, but the peoples of all civilized nations will
 have published to their knowledge that the American National Red Cross
 has a home and a recognized abiding-place through all generations.

 For this I have striven for years, mainly misunderstood, often
 misinterpreted, and it is through your clear intuition and humane
 thought that the clouds have been swept away and my hopes have been
 realized.

 In accordance with views expressed by you in your letter of gift, I
 appoint an adviser, which I insist shall be yourself, leaving you
 free to appoint another to work jointly with you, knowing that in the
 future, as in the past, your heart will be in the work.

  CLARA BARTON

  President American National Red Cross


The gift, as it developed, was not without its conditions; the
donors could not quite afford to give it outright, but would sell
it for a sum very much less than its value in consideration of the
philanthropic purposes to which it was to be dedicated. This seemed
not unreasonable, and the deed was accepted subject to the specified
conditions. It seemed to Clara Barton a beautiful achievement; there
was to be one spot on the Western Hemisphere where in case of war the
rights of humanity would be accepted as supreme. Located as it was in
the interior of the country, and removed by rail only a few hours
from the great cities of Chicago, St. Louis, Cincinnati, Louisville,
Indianapolis, and Toledo, and surrounded by fertile farms, it could
become in an emergency a vast storehouse of supplies, a great base
hospital for the suffering.

Unfortunately, it did not prove to be all that she had anticipated.
The conditions specified and implied proved to be of such a character
as to render the gift unsuitable for the purposes which she had hoped
to accomplish. The manager into whose hands she committed its care
proved incompetent and, in the end, ungrateful. The gift had to be
relinquished and the money paid toward it was written down as a total
loss.

In 1896 occurred Miss Barton’s experience in Constantinople, where
the Red Cross had its headquarters during her memorable work for the
Armenians. There she visited Scutari, and gave an address on the scene
of Florence Nightingale’s great work. She returned overland through
Vienna, Strassburg, Paris, London, and Liverpool. She left London
October 8, 1896. On her return to Washington she was given a great
banquet attended by some of the most distinguished people in Washington.

The following year, 1897, she was appointed by the President to attend
the International Red Cross Congress in Vienna, Austria.

In 1898 she did her notable work in connection with the
Spanish-American War, and for the next two years was fully occupied
with affairs at home.

In 1902 she went abroad again, this time as a delegate to the
conference held in St. Petersburg, the last of the great conferences
which she attended. This journey has its record in two letters, one
to her niece, Mrs. Ida Barton Riccius, and the other to her nephew,
Stephen E. Barton:

  _En route_ FROM ST. PETERSBURG
  TO THE GERMAN FRONTIER
  June 18, 1902

 The conference is ended, Russia has been visited, and we are well, and
 well on the way toward home. It has been a most fortunate journey, no
 accidents, no illness. Attended a great and harmonious conference,
 royally met and cared for, with nothing to be regretted.

 We went first to Havre, France, to Paris for a few days, then to
 Berlin a few days, then on toward Russia. At the crossing on the
 frontier, we were met by a Red Cross escort, and taken on, for
 transportation to St. Petersburg, about the 15th of May. Went into
 Hôtel de France, where we have remained till yesterday, nearly three
 weeks. The conference opened on the 16th with two sittings a day, and
 entertainments at evening unless it was necessary to take the day for
 some excursion, or visit to some royal entertainment. The conference
 lasted about eight days; it was composed of delegates from nearly
 fifty nations; subjects of a humanitarian character were discussed
 as connected with the work of the Red Cross. In Russia everything is
 Red Cross, all hospital work, all emergency work, nearly all relief
 work, care of children, orphans, foundlings. The women are educated
 to do this work. They enter the schools in the hospitals at eighteen
 to twenty, serve one year on probation, two as novices, then they
 may receive and wear the Red Cross and be nurses, at a small sum in
 money per month, board, clothes, care if sick,--a good home as long
 as they live. When too old, or no longer able to work, they have
 pensions given them and may remain _in_ the hospital and be cared for
 always if they choose, or if they have relatives and _want_ to live
 with them they can have their pensions and go to them, and _return_
 always if they like. The hospital is _always_ their home, if they want
 it, or they may marry if they choose; then they leave. They _seemed_
 so happy, looked so healthy; many of them are orphan girls who had
 no home; nowhere else _to_ be. They are not Catholic, but of the
 Protestant Church of Russia, though _I_ see little difference between
 it and the Catholic. The churches are magnificent,--such wealth of
 ornamentation. The bishops seem like Catholic priests. The people are
 very devout, but still very lively, and _kind_; they seem to me to be
 the kindest people I ever saw. All the royal persons look kind; they
 have good faces; but the kindest face of all is that of the Czar. He
 is young, handsome, looks like a mature college graduate. The Czarina
 is also handsome; she was the granddaughter of Queen Victoria; they
 have four children, are very fond of them, and of _each other_.

 We went on an excursion to Moscow, saw the city Napoleon went to
 capture, and which he found trouble in getting out of. We went to the
 Kremlin where he stayed; the rooms he lived in the few days while the
 city was burning, and the ways by which he retreated. We visited the
 Grand Duke, who is the Governor-General of Moscow, and whose wife
 is sister of the Empress, another granddaughter of Victoria, the
 daughter of Alice of Hesse, who died many years ago of diphtheria
 while nursing three children through it. The Grand Duchess is said
 to be the handsomest woman in Russia. I think that may be true, and
 after I returned to Petersburg she _sent me her picture_--beautiful!!
 Everybody was so kind to us all, but I felt they were especially kind
 to me. I never saw such treatment of guests; they wouldn’t _let_ you
 spend money. Carriages were at the disposal of all the delegates, all
 places of amusement free, guides provided; lunches, like dinners,
 provided each day at the conference, a hundred persons fed somewhere,
 two or three times a day, and _such_ feeding!! Very many of the
 delegates were old friends of mine. I had met them in five other
 conferences; they were so genial and attentive.

 As I am going to ask you to let Ada and Mamie read this, and _Harold_,
 too, I must tell you about the horses, the finest I have ever seen.
 They have two choice kinds, the “black Orlorf,” and the dapple gray,
 good size, carriage horses, and they go like the wind. The Orlorf
 was brought into St. Petersburg (perhaps into Russia as well) by
 Count Orlorf a good many years ago. The males are not changed, kept
 as stallions in full strength and spirit, and, when past active or
 first-class service, are kept for breeding purposes. They are not
 allowed to be _sold_ out of Russia, it is said. They weigh from one
 thousand to fourteen hundred pounds, are jet black, have glossy hair,
 high arching necks, step as proud as war-horses, with full even
 tails, trimmed at the bottom to keep them from touching the ground.
 The Russian harness is not half the weight of ours, and much less of
 it; the shafts are kept away from the body, and _all_ horses are round
 and fat. I have not seen a poor horse in Russia. The grays are much
 like the black, only dappled, as if painted, so dark, and distinct
 dapples, with also the heavy beautiful tails. I asked to go through
 the Royal stalls--the Czar has eight hundred horses in his stud; a
 part are in Peterhof, ten miles away. The horses were in stalls about
 two thirds as wide, big stalls as Baba’s, say six to seven feet,
 with wooden floors, a narrow crack running the whole length to keep
 them dry, half a foot of clean dry straw in each, a little manger
 for grain, a little wire rack for hay, a good blanket on each, and
 you have the entire outfit of this beautiful “stud of Royal horses.”
 They were gentle and didn’t mind a strange hand on them, and the
 gentlemanly uniformed groom encouraged it, and smiled at their quiet,
 good behaviour. Some of the carriages are for two, some four, and
 some eight horses. The gilded and gemmed carriages are especially for
 Coronation occasions, some of them one hundred and fifty years old,
 bright and beautiful as yesterday. Ordinarily the Royal people ride in
 common carriages and drive a great deal, to hospitals, to all houses
 of charity, schools, orphanages, and churches. They are the patrons of
 all these, and give great sums to them.

 The Empress has schools of hundreds of young women and young ladies
 in St. Petersburg studying from the lowest to the highest branches,
 art and literature, which she visits every week; they are fitting
 themselves, not alone for society, but to go all over Russia to teach.
 The Russians have all the societies we have, “Prevention of Cruelty
 to Animals,” which they don’t seem to need as much as we do. I might
 except temperance societies, which they do not have, and probably need
 about _as_ much as we, only the Russian doesn’t fight and quarrel when
 he gets drunk; he goes to sleep.

 Have I told you that there is no real night in northern Russia at this
 season of the year? Ask Saidee to trace it on her atlas and she will
 find that St. Petersburg is in the _same_ latitude of the southern
 ends of Alaska and Greenland, consequently they have long days and
 short nights in summer, and long nights and short days in winter; it
 being summer now, we have no real night. The twilight lasted till
 eleven-thirty sure, and the sun rose at two-thirty. I went to bed by
 daylight, either at one end or the other of the day. I wrote without
 a lamp at eleven o’clock at night. The people are in the streets all
 night, but there is no disturbance, no one is hurt or attacked. The
 police are always on duty, not in the saloons, waiting to be called
 to some disturbance, but in the middle of the street, to _see that
 there is no disturbance_, and there is none; no people are killed in
 dark alleys here. The would-be killer would be killed first, unless he
 threw a bomb, and then he would be killed after.

 This is an unmercifully long letter. I wish you would let it go to Ada
 and Mamie. If I had a typewriter I would duplicate it, and send to
 each, but I have none, and write all by hand. I will take this on to
 Berlin to post, where we shall arrive at ten to-morrow morning, for a
 few days’ stay.

 With greatest love to all,

  Your always loving
  CLARA

 This is my “howdy” to all the loved ones, from Europe.

  HÔTEL SCRIBE, RUE SCRIBE
  PARIS, July 26, 1902

  MY DEAR STEVE:

 This is Saturday, and I sail to-morrow. I did not intend to write you
 in time for you to receive it, and perhaps feel that you must fly
 around to meet me in New York. I only wanted to tell you _that_--and
 _when_ I would sail so you could calculate in what country I should
 most likely be. I go to Boulogne to-morrow, Sunday morning, July 27th,
 to catch the S.S. _Pennsylvania_ as she steams on for New York. I
 expect to find Mr. Tillinghast on board, as he has arranged to finish
 his month’s tour of southern Europe in time to take the _Pennsylvania_
 at Hamburg. Boulogne is her last point of land, and any one knowing me
 would conclude I would stick to the _land_ as long as possible.

 We had a glorious conference, and were gloriously received, no
 kindness or courtesy, and sometimes it seemed as if no luxury, was
 omitted. There were no errors, and perfect harmony prevailed. We went
 on an excursion to Moscow for three days, returned to Petersburg,
 finished all up, did nothing carelessly, nor in too great haste;
 wrote my report of the conference, some twenty pages, sent it to
 President Roosevelt; made out all my accounts with the Government
 ready to present on my return; and when all was finished, left with
 Mr. Tillinghast, who took the place of secretary, for Berlin; remained
 a week, when Mr. Tillinghast started on his journey of sight-seeing.
 The other delegates had long gone, and I made for Carlsruhe for a
 stay of two weeks. My time was divided between the Grand Duchess and
 Princess Salm Salm, who, at present, resides there. The Salm Salm
 was one of the old high houses of Germany, and greatly venerated for
 patriotic and noble qualities. The husband of the Princess you will
 remember historically, perhaps. Prince Felix left Germany to fight in
 _our_ war; raised a regiment, became its colonel, till the close, then
 followed Maximilian to Mexico, stayed by him, with the Princess, till
 he was shot, then returned to Germany to his estates at Gravelotte.
 Not a bad record!

 I remained at Carlsruhe till the “close of the Court Season,” was
 present by invitation at the closing of the Parliament, heard the
 Grand Duke deliver his splendid address, spent the evening after
 socially, and alone, with the Grand Duke and Duchess, till eleven
 o’clock. At two they started for the _mountains_, the Princess two
 days later; and between them I slipped off to Strassburg, then to
 Geneva, then _via_ Strassburg again to Paris, to wait for my steamer.
 The _Pennsylvania_ is not a quick but is a steady-going sailer, and
 will, D.V., get us over in about eight days, when I will quietly slip
 down home, as if I had never been away. No mistakes have been made, no
 bad luck, not a day’s illness of any one that I know of. Well enough
 managed, it seems to me, and fortunately ended, if it does end well
 the rest of the way.

 I didn’t intend to write so much. What you haven’t time to read you
 can put in your pocket. Love to all.




CHAPTER XIV

CLARA BARTON IN CUBA


For many years before the outbreak of the war with Spain, Clara Barton
had been interested in the situation in Cuba. In a letter written from
Washington, February 8, 1874, twenty-four years before the outbreak of
the war with Spain, she said:

 Spain is still fighting her only or almost sole remaining colony,
 Cuba. Spain had once immense colonies, but she has been so tyrannical
 and so careless of their welfare that she has lost nearly all. And
 Cuba, you know, “has an insurgent army,” of so-called rebels fighting
 for their freedom. If she ever gets free, she must come to the
 United States, as she is too small to stand alone against the greed
 of great powers which will try to gobble her up for her riches in
 soil and products. The Spanish authorities have just published a new
 list of orders, very stringent, and they hope to crush out the Cuban
 insurrection in six months. You must keep watch of that, too, and see
 how it ends. It will be history by and by to whom Cuba belongs, and,
 while one has to study so hard to learn past history, it is not worth
 the while to let slip that which all the time is making in our own day
 and generation. Comprenez vous?

Her forecast of events proved to be reliable. The relations between
Spain and Cuba grew more and more strained. A part of the Spanish
policy for stamping out the rebellion in Cuba was the concentration
of that portion of the civilian population believed to be hostile to
the Spanish Government, in concentration camps, from which the cry
of distress was continuous. Sympathy in America grew more and more
pronounced, but for a long time there appeared no way in which the
United States could offer relief. The difficulties of the situation
were the greater because the Spanish Government believed, with some
reason, that a considerable part of the American sentiment favorable
to relief in Cuba was intermixed with political designs. There were,
indeed, two groups of people demanding relief for Cuba. Clara Barton
thus describes them:

 They might have properly been classed under two distinct heads. The
 one, merely the friends of humanity in its simple sense; the other,
 friends of humanity also, but what seemed to them a broader and deeper
 sense, far more complex. They sought to remove a cause as well as an
 effect, and the muffled cry of “Cuba Libre” became their watchword.
 Naturally, any general movement by the people in favor of the former
 must have the effect to diminish the contributions of the latter,
 too small at best for their purpose, and must be wisely discouraged.
 Thus, whenever an unsuspecting movement was set on foot by some
 good-hearted, unsophisticated body of people, and began to gain
 favor with the public and the press, immediately would appear most
 convincing counter-paragraphs to the effect that it would be useless
 to send relief, especially by the Red Cross:

 First, it would not be permitted to land.

 Next, whatever it took would be either seized outright, or “wheedled”
 out of hand by the Spanish authorities in Havana.

 That the Spaniards would be only too glad to have the United States
 send food and money for the use of Havana.

 Again, that the Red Cross, being international, would affiliate with
 Spain, and ignore the “Cuban Red Cross” already working there and
 here. As if poor Cuba, with no national government or treaty-making
 power, could have a legitimate Red Cross that other nations could
 recognize or work with.

Miss Barton had but recently returned from Armenia. Her experience with
the Turkish Government made her keenly aware of all the obstructions
which an unsympathetic government can put in the way of philanthropic
relief. It was useless to attempt any assistance for the sufferers
in Cuba unless Miss Barton had the full approval of the American
Government, and in addition the sympathetic coöperation of the Spanish
Government. But if she secured the consent of the Government of Spain,
there was real danger that her work of relief would result less in the
succor of the distressed people of Cuba than in the aid and comfort of
the armies of their oppressors. Spain could not be expected to look
with favor upon any kind of relief which promised to strengthen the
Cuban rebellion. At length, however, the situation grew intolerable;
it became evident that the United States must go into Cuba either with
an army of occupation or an agency for the relief of suffering. As a
matter of fact, the United States went in both capacities, but the Red
Cross went in before the Stars and Stripes. Miss Barton herself has
told the story of the invasion:

 This state of things continued through the year of 1897, but as the
 present year of ’98 opened the reports of suffering that came were not
 to be borne quietly, and I decided to confer with our Government and
 learn if it had objections to the Red Cross taking steps of its own
 in direct touch with the people of the country, and proposing their
 coöperation in the work of relief. I beg pardon for the personality of
 the statement which follows, but it is history I am asked to write.

 Deciding to refer my inquiry to the Secretary of State, I called at
 his department to see him, but learned that he was with the President.
 This suiting my purpose, I followed to the Executive Mansion, was
 kindly informed that the President and Secretary were engaged on a
 very important matter, and had given orders not to be interrupted. As
 I turned to leave I was recalled with, “Wait a moment, Miss Barton,
 and let me present your card.” Returning immediately, I entered the
 President’s room to find these two men in a perplexed study over the
 very matter which had called me. Distressed by the reports of the
 terrible condition of things so new to us, they were seeking some
 remedy, and, producing their notes just taken, revealed the fact that
 they had decided to call me into conference.

 The conference was then held. It was decided to form a committee
 in New York, to ask money and material of the people at large to
 be shipped to Cuba for the relief of the _reconcentrados_ on that
 island. The call would be made in the name of the President, and the
 committee naturally known as the “President’s Committee for Cuban
 Relief.” I was courteously asked if I would go to New York and assume
 the oversight of that committee. I declined in favor of Mr. Stephen
 E. Barton, second vice-president of the National Red Cross, who, on
 being immediately called, accepted; and with Mr. Charles Schieren as
 treasurer and Mr. Louis Klopsch, of the “Christian Herald,” as the
 third member, the committee was at once established; since known as
 the “Central Cuban Relief Committee.”

 The committee was to solicit aid in money and material for the
 suffering _reconcentrados_ in Cuba, and forward the same to the
 Consul-General at Havana for distribution. My consent was then
 asked by all parties to go to Cuba and aid in the distribution of
 the shipments of food as they should arrive. After all I had so
 long offered, I could not decline, and hoping my going would not be
 misunderstood by our authorities there, who would regard me simply
 as a willing assistant, I accepted. The Consul-General had asked the
 New York Committee to send to him an assistant to take charge of the
 warehouse and supplies in Havana. This request was also referred to
 me, and recommending Mr. J. K. Elwell, nephew of General J. J. Elwell,
 of Cleveland, Ohio, a gentleman who had resided six years in Santiago
 in connection with its large shipping interests, a fine business man
 and speaking Spanish, I decided to accompany him, taking no member of
 my own staff, but going simply in the capacity of an individual helper
 in a work already assigned.

 On Saturday, February 6, we left Washington for Cuba _via_
 Jacksonville, Tampa, and Key West.

 Thus, with that simple beginning, with no thought on the part of any
 person but to do unobtrusively the little that could be done for
 the lessening of the woes of a small island of people, whom adverse
 circumstances, racial differences, the inevitable results of a
 struggle for freedom, the fate of war, and the terrible features of
 a system of subjugation of a people, which, if true, is too dark to
 name, was commenced the relief movement of 1898 which has spread
 not alone over the entire United States of America from Maine to
 California, from Vancouver to the Gulf of Mexico, but from the Indias
 on the west, to the Indias on the east, and uniting in its free-will
 offerings the gifts of one third of the best nations in the world.

Miss Barton with her cargo of supplies reached Havana on February 9,
1898. Her supplies were unloaded and stored in a convenient warehouse.
She began her work of visitation and found scenes beside which, as she
wrote, some which she had witnessed in Armenia seemed humane. Six days
after her arrival the _Maine_ was blown up. The appalling news reached
the United States and brought with it the practical certainty of war.
The one cheering message that came as an echo of the explosion was
Clara Barton’s telegram, “I am with the wounded.” The comfort of these
words found expression in a little poem by James Clarence Harvey, which
was published immediately in the “Christian Herald” and widely copied:

  “I am with the wounded,” flashed along the wire
  From the isle of Cuba, swept with sword and fire.
  Angel sweet of mercy, may your cross of red
  Cheer the wounded living; bless the wounded dead.

  “I am with the starving,” let the message run
  From this stricken island, when this task is done;
  Food and money plenty wait at your command,
  Give in generous measure; fill each outstretched hand.

  “I am with the happy,” this we long to hear
  From the isle of Cuba, trembling now in fear:
  May the great disaster touch the hearts of men,
  And, in God’s great mercy, bring back peace again.

Miss Barton thus related the story of the sinking of the _Maine_, and
of the work that followed:

 The heavy clerical work of that fifteenth day of February held not
 only myself, but Mr. Elwell as well, busy at our writing-tables until
 late at night. The house had grown still; the noises on the streets
 were dying away, when suddenly the table shook from under our hands,
 the great glass door opening on to the veranda, facing the sea, flew
 open; everything in the room was in motion or out of place--the
 deafening roar of such a burst of thunder as perhaps one never heard
 before, and off to the right, out over the bay, the air was filled
 with a blaze of light, and this in turn filled with black specks like
 huge specters flying in all directions. Then it faded away. The bells
 rang; the whistles blew; and voices in the street were heard for a
 moment; then all was quiet again. I supposed it to be the bursting of
 some mammoth mortar or explosion of some magazine. A few hours later
 came the terrible news of the _Maine_.

 Mr. Elwell was early among the wreckage, and returned to give me news.

 She is destroyed. There is no room for comment, only who is lost, who
 has escaped, and what can be done for them? They tell us that most of
 the officers were dining out, and thus saved; that Captain Sigsbee is
 saved. It is thought that two hundred and fifty men are lost, that one
 hundred are wounded, but still living, some in hospital, some on small
 boats as picked up. The chief engineer, a quiet, resolute man, and the
 second officer met me as I passed out of the hotel for the hospital.
 The latter stopped me saying, “Miss Barton, do you remember you told
 me on board the _Maine_ that the Red Cross was at our service; for
 whenever anything took place with that ship, either in naval action or
 otherwise, _some one_ would be hurt; that she was not of a structure
 to take misfortune lightly?” I recalled the conversation and the
 impression which led to it,--such strength would never go out easily.

 We proceeded to the Spanish hospital San Ambrosia, to find thirty to
 forty wounded--bruised, cut, burned; they had been crushed by timbers,
 cut by iron, scorched by fire, and blown sometimes high in the air,
 sometimes driven down through the red-hot furnace room and out into
 the water, senseless, to be picked up by some boat and gotten ashore.
 Their wounds are all over them--heads and faces terribly cut, internal
 wounds, arms, legs, feet, and hands burned to the live flesh. The hair
 and beards are singed, showing that the burns were from fire and not
 steam; besides further evidence shows that the burns are where the
 parts were uncovered. If burned by steam, the clothing would have held
 the steam and burned all the deeper. As it is, it protected from the
 heat and the fire and saved their limbs, whilst the faces, hands, and
 arms are terribly burned. Both men and officers are very reticent in
 regard to the cause, but all declare it could not have been the result
 of an internal explosion. That the boilers were at the two ends of
 the ship, and these were the places from which all escaped who did
 escape. The trouble was evidently from the center of the ship, where
 no explosive machinery was located.

 I thought to take the names as I passed among them, and, drawing near
 to the first in the long line, I asked his name. He gave it with his
 address; then peering out from among the bandages and cotton about
 his breast and face, he looked earnestly at me and asked: “Isn’t this
 Miss Barton?” “Yes.” “I thought it must be. I knew you were here, and
 thought you would come to us. I am so thankful for us all.”

 I asked if he wanted anything. “Yes. There is a lady to whom I was to
 be married. The time is up. She will be frantic if she hears of this
 accident and nothing more. Could you telegraph her?” “Certainly!” The
 dispatch went at once: “Wounded, but saved.” Alas, it was only for a
 little; two days later, and it was all over.

 I passed on from one to another, till twelve had been spoken to
 and the names taken. There were only two of the number who did not
 recognize me. Their expressions of grateful thanks, spoken under such
 conditions, were too much. I passed the pencil to another hand and
 stepped aside.

 I am glad to say that every kindness was extended to them. Miss Mary
 Wilberforce had been at once installed as nurse, and faithful work
 she performed. The Spanish hospital attendants were tireless in
 their attentions. Still, there was boundless room for luxuries and
 comforts, delicate foods, grapes, oranges, wines, cordials, anything
 that could soothe or interest; and no opportunity was lost, or cost or
 pains spared, and when two days later the streets filled with hearses
 bearing reverently the bodies of martyred heroes; and the crape and
 the flowers mingled in their tributes of tenderness and beauty, and
 the muffled drums and tolling bells spoke all that inanimate substance
 could speak of sorrow and respect; and the silent marching tread of
 armies fell upon the listening ear,--the heart grew sick in the midst
 of all this pageant, and the thoughts turned away to the far land,
 smitten with horror, and the homes wailing in bitter grief for these,
 so lone, so lost; and one saw only the

  Nodding plumes over their bier to wave,
  And God’s own hand in that lonely land
      To lay them in their grave.


In the days after the sinking of the _Maine_, Miss Barton led an active
life. She journeyed through the nearer provinces, established bases of
supplies and returned to Havana, not only unmolested, but with every
evidence of appreciation on the part of the Spanish authorities and
the Cuban people. The Red Cross supplies were distributed, though in
places their distribution was impeded. Miss Barton tells of a delayed
distribution at Matanzas, the delay apparently having been accomplished
with intent, and how well-meant private philanthropy undertook direct
action:

 It is not strange that from this event went out the cry of “starving
 Matanzas,” although at that moment, in addition to our four tons of
 goods previously sent, the _Fern_ lay in the harbor under the American
 flag, with fifty tons of American supplies, and fifty rods away lay
 the _Bergen_, under the same colors, bearing a cargo of fifty-two tons
 from the Philadelphia Red Cross, faithfully sent through the New York
 Committee, by request. So uncontrollable a thing is human excitement
 that these facts could not be taken in, and the charities of our
 whole country were called afresh to arms over “starving Matanzas,”
 which was at that moment by far the best provided city in Cuba. The
 result of this was an entire train of supplies from Kansas, which,
 remaining there after the blockade, not being consigned to the Red
 Cross, was, we were informed, distributed among the Spanish soldiery
 by the Spanish officials. Goods bearing the mark of the Red Cross were
 everywhere respected, and we have no record of any of _our_ goods
 having been appropriated by the Spanish authorities.

When the methods of relief had been well organized, the work of
distribution went mainly to others while Clara Barton devoted her
own energy to the maintenance of pleasant relations with the Spanish
authorities. This she was able to do until the very end; but events
far beyond her control were inevitably driving the two nations into
war. Miss Barton tells the story in the following record based upon the
entries in her own diary:

 I met the Spanish authorities, not merely as a bearer of relief, but
 as the president of the American National Red Cross, with all the
 principles of neutrality which that implied, and received in return
 the unfailing courtesy which the conditions demanded. From our first
 interview to the last sad day when we decided that it was better to
 withdraw, giving up all efforts at relief, and leave those thousands
 of poor, dying wretches to their fate, there was never any change in
 the attitude of the Spanish authorities, General Blanco, or his staff,
 toward myself or any member of my staff. One of my last visits before
 the blockade was to the palace. The same kindly spirit prevailed;
 I was begged not to leave the island through fear of them; every
 protection in their power would be given, but there was no guarantee
 for what might occur in the exigencies of war. I recall an incident
 of that day: General Blanco led me to the large salon, the walls of
 which are covered with the portraits of the Spanish officials for
 generations past, and, pointing to the Spanish authorities under date
 of 1776, said, with a look of sadness, “When your country was in
 trouble, Spain was the friend of America. Now Spain is in trouble,
 America is her enemy.” I knew no answer for this but silence, and
 we passed out through the corridor of guards, he handing me to my
 carriage with a farewell and a blessing. I could but recall my
 experience with the Turkish officials and Government, where I entered
 with such apprehension and left with such marks of cordiality.

 During this interval of time important business had called me to
 Washington, and I only returned to Cuba sometime during the second
 week of April.

On April 25, 1898, Congress declared war against Spain. For two weeks
it had been apparent that such a declaration was to come. American
citizens were ordered by the United States Government to leave Havana
some days before the outbreak of hostilities. This situation sent
Miss Barton out of Cuba and quickly sent her back again. She was not,
however, permitted at once to continue her relief for the distressed
Cubans. The military and naval authorities of the United States were as
anxious not to aid Spain as the Spanish authorities were anxious that
she should not aid the rebellious Cubans. Miss Barton tells the story
of her departure and return:

 The order was for all American citizens to leave Havana, and the order
 was obeyed, but not without having laid the matter formally in council
 before my staff of assistants and taking their opinion and advice,
 which was to the effect that, while personally they would prefer to
 remain for the chance of the little good that might be accomplished,
 in view of the distress which we should give our friends at home,
 and, in fact, the whole country, when it should be known that we
 were inside that wall of fire that would confront us, with no way of
 extricating or reaching us, it seemed both wiser and more humane to
 leave. And the 9th of April saw us again on shipboard, a party of
 twenty, bound for Tampa. We would not, however, go beyond, but made
 headquarters there, remaining within easy call of any need there might
 be for us. Here follow the few weeks of impending war. Do we need to
 live them over? Do we even want to recall them? Days when the elder
 men of thought and memory pondered deeply and questioned much! When
 the mother, patriot though she were, uttered her sentiments through
 choking voice and tender, trembling words, and the young men, caring
 nothing, fearing nothing, rushed gallantly on to doom and to death!
 To how many households, alas, these days recall themselves in tones
 never to be forgotten!

 Notwithstanding all this excitement and confusion and all the
 pressure that weighed upon him, our good President still remembered
 the suffering, dying _reconcentrados_, and requested that a ship be
 provided as quickly as possible, loaded from the warerooms of the
 indefatigable Cuban Relief Committee in New York, and be sent for the
 relief of the sufferers in Cuba whenever they could be reached. One
 need not say with what promptness this committee acted, and I was
 informed that the _State of Texas_, laden with fourteen hundred tons
 of food, would shortly leave New York _en route_ for Key West, and
 it was the desire of that committee and the Government that I take
 command of the ship, and, with my staff and such assistants as I would
 select, undertake the getting of that food to its destination.

 Some members of the staff were in New York, and with Dr. Hubbell in
 charge sailed from that port on Saturday, the 23d of April. A hasty
 trip from Washington, gathering up the waiting staff at Tampa, and
 pushing on by the earliest train brought us to Key West in time to
 meet the _State of Texas_ as she arrived, board her and take charge of
 the snug little ship that was henceforth to take its place in American
 history. She was well built, but by no means new, nor handsome. Her
 dull black hull could in no way compare with the snow-white, green and
 red striped hospital ships, those heralds of relief that afterwards
 graced the waters of that bay. Still she was firm, sound, heavy-laden,
 and gave promise of some good to some one at some future day, that day
 being only when the great war monsters should have pealed out to the
 world that an entrance was made on the coast of Cuba, and we would be
 invited to follow.

 By the authorities at Washington, the _State of Texas_ had been
 consigned to the protection of the navy, and accordingly we must
 report our arrival. This was done to the senior officer, representing
 Admiral Sampson, in the port, Captain Harrington, of the monitor
 _Puritan_. This brought at once a personal call from the captain
 with an invitation to our entire staff to visit his beautiful ship
 the following day. The launch of the _Puritan_ was sent to take us,
 and not only was the ship inspected, but the dainties of his elegant
 tea-table as well.

 When all was over, the graceful launch returned us safely to our
 ship, with grateful memories on the part of the younger members of
 our company, who had never chanced to form an intimate acquaintance
 with a piece of shipping at once so beautiful and so terrible as that
 death-dealing engine of destruction. I record this visit and courtesy
 on the part of Captain Harrington as the first of an unfailing series
 of kindnesses extended by the navy to the Red Cross from first to
 last. There was no favor too great, no courtesy too high to be
 cheerfully rendered on every occasion.

 The memories of pitiful Cuba would not leave us, and, knowing that
 under our decks were fourteen hundred tons of food, for the want of
 which its people were dying, the impulse to reach them grew very
 strong, and a letter was addressed to Admiral Sampson.

 This brought immediately the launch of the _New York_ to the side
 of our ship, and Captain Chadwick, the gallant officer whom no one
 forgets, stepped lightly on board to deliver the written message from
 the admiral, or rather to take me to the _New York_. Nothing could
 have exceeded the courtesy of the admiral, but we were acting from
 entirely opposite standpoints. I had been requested to take a ship,
 and by every means in my power get food into Cuba. He, on the other
 hand, had been commanded to take a fleet, and by every means in his
 power keep food out of Cuba. When one compared the two ships lying
 side by side and thought of a contest of effort between them, the
 situation was ludicrous, and yet the admiral did not absolutely refuse
 to give me a flag of truce and attempt an entrance into Havana; but he
 disapproved it, feared the results for me, and, acting in accordance
 with _his_ highest wisdom and best judgment, I felt it to be my place
 to wait.

The delay which resulted was annoying but not wholly unprofitable, and
there came a time when the army and navy were glad enough to have the
American Red Cross in Cuba. On June 20th the _State of Texas_ sailed
from Key West with orders to find Admiral Sampson and report to him.
They found him a few days later off Santiago, in time for their share
in the stirring events which accompanied and followed the destruction
of Cervera’s fleet, the battle of San Juan Hill, and the surrender on
July 17th of the harbor and city of Santiago.

When the city had been formally surrendered and a sufficient number
of mines had been removed from the harbor to permit American vessels
to enter, a very gracious compliment was paid to Clara Barton by the
victorious United States Navy. The first vessel to enter the harbor was
not the flagship of either of the Admirals Sampson or Schley, but the
_State of Texas_ under command of Clara Barton.

Perhaps that may be called the crowning moment of her life. Clara
Barton was more than seventy-eight years old, but she stood erect on
the deck of her vessel, modestly appreciative and quietly thankful, not
so much for the honor that had come to her as for the opportunity of
serving.

Miss Barton returned to Washington in November, 1898. The work
which she went to Cuba to perform, that of relieving the Cuban
_reconcentrados_, was never wholly accomplished. That relief came
with the freedom of Cuba, and for this she was profoundly thankful;
but she never ceased to feel sad when she thought of the people who
suffered during those weeks of waiting while her vessel was packed
with the supplies which the people so sorely needed. “Cuba was a hard
field, full of heartbreaking memories,” she wrote. “It gave the first
opportunity to test the first cooperation between the United States and
its supplemental hand-maiden the Red Cross.”

While this coöperation was incomplete, its results were most
beneficial, as many an American soldier and surgeon can testify.

At the close of the war, the Congress of the United States tendered
the thanks of the Nation to Clara Barton in the following resolution
which was introduced in the Senate by the venerable Senator Hoar, and
unanimously adopted:

 Resolved, That the thanks of Congress be presented to Clara Barton, of
 Massachusetts, founder of the institution of the Red Cross, and to the
 officers and agents of the Society of the Red Cross for their humane
 and beneficent service to humanity in relieving the distress of the
 Armenians and other suffering persons in Turkey, and in ministering
 to the sufferings caused by pestilence in the United States, and for
 the like ministration and relief given by them to both sides in the
 Spanish West Indies during the present war.

An even higher mark of appreciation was contained in the annual message
of President McKinley:

 In this connection it is a pleasure for me to mention in terms of
 cordial appreciation the timely and useful work of the American
 National Red Cross both in relief measures preparatory to the
 campaigns, in sanitary assistance at several of the camps of
 assemblage, and later, under the able and experienced leadership
 of the president of the society, Miss Clara Barton, on the fields
 of battle and in the hospitals at the front in Cuba. Working in
 conjunction with the governmental authorities and under their sanction
 and approval, and with the enthusiastic coöperation of many patriotic
 women and societies in the various States, the Red Cross has fully
 maintained its already high reputation for intense earnestness
 and ability to exercise the noble purposes of its international
 organization, thus justifying the confidence and support which it
 has received at the hands of the American people. To the members and
 officers of this society and all who aided them in their philanthropic
 work, the sincere and lasting gratitude of the soldiers and the public
 is due and is freely accorded.

 In tracing these events we are constantly reminded of our obligations
 to the Divine Master for his watchful care over us and his safe
 guidance, for which the nation makes reverent acknowledgment and
 offers humble prayer for the continuance of his favor.




CHAPTER XV

CLARA BARTON’S RETIREMENT FROM THE RED CROSS


It would have been well if Clara Barton had retired from the active
work of the presidency of the American Red Cross at the close of
the war with Spain. She had accomplished in her lifetime an almost
incredible total of heroic work. She had completed seventy-eight
years of service; she had created the American Red Cross and led it
successfully in peace and war. On twenty different fields on both
sides of the ocean she had raised its banner over areas devastated by
fire, flood, famine, and pestilence. She had won the support of her
Government to an enterprise till then unknown and but little regarded.
She had made the Red Cross in America so useful in times of peace that
the Red Cross societies of the world had widened their spheres of
operation to incorporate her plans of service. She had crowned her long
and arduous career with an achievement that won for her the heart of
the American army and navy in Cuba, and brought to her the thanks of
the Congress and of the President of the United States. She could have
retired with honors such as no woman in America ever had won. If her
judgment told her that this was the time for her to transfer her burden
of active supervision to some younger person, her heart triumphed over
her judgment.

She was eighty years of age when, on September 8, 1900, a tornado and
tidal wave submerged Galveston, Texas. Five days later Clara Barton
was on the ground. Difficulties of transportation held her back for
twenty-four hours or she would have been there a day sooner.

Her plea for lumber, hardware, and other materials for providing
temporary shelter met with a nation-wide response, and supplies of food
and clothing, as well as considerable sums of money, were placed at her
disposal.

After six weeks spent in Texas, Clara Barton returned, worn out by
her exertions, but bringing the grateful thanks of the people of
Galveston, and, in addition, an official letter of thanks from the
governor of the State of Texas and also of its legislature. The Central
Relief Committee of Galveston also tendered her a series of engrossed
resolutions, declaring that she deserved to be “exalted above queens,”
and that her achievements were “greater than the conquests of nations
or the inventions of genius.”

In the following year occurred the seventh International Conference of
the Red Cross, already referred to, held at St. Petersburg in Russia
and extending from the middle of May until near the end of June of
1902. Clara Barton headed the delegation from the United States. The
conference was held under the high patronage of Her Majesty the Empress
Dowager Marie Feodorovna. Miss Barton was the guest of the Emperor
and Empress. No delegate to the conference was treated with greater
consideration than Clara Barton. At the close of the conference she was
decorated by the Emperor, who conferred upon Clara Barton the Russian
decoration of the Order of the Red Cross.

Two of her letters concerning this journey have been quoted in a
previous chapter. Clara Barton returned to her own land crowned
with additional honors, but confronting new and wholly unexpected
difficulties.

The American Red Cross had been reincorporated by Act of Congress
June 6, 1900. Under the new form of organization the board and its
executive committee possessed large powers. There was a feeling on
the part of some members of the board that the American Red Cross was
too exclusively under the direction of Clara Barton. Her work for
the relief of Galveston had been undertaken almost the moment that
she first learned of its great need. She had not waited to call an
executive committee meeting. While her work in that field was most
heartily commended, there was a feeling on the part of members of the
board that the Red Cross, being now virtually a representative organ
of the United States Government, its fields of service should be
determined, not by the judgment of an individual, but of the governing
body of the organization itself. There was further criticism growing
out of the fact that, when emergencies arose by reason of any great
national disaster, a considerable part of the money was sent direct to
Clara Barton on the field, and expended by her without passing through
the hands of the treasurer.

Miss Barton admitted that she had made these decisions at times without
the formal authority of her executive committee, and that she had
received and expended money according to her best judgment when the
emergency was at hand. She did not desire to be bound by burdensome
restrictions; she wished to be at liberty to meet the need whenever it
should arrive, and in the way that seemed to be necessary.

If everything had gone well with the Red Cross during the absence of
Clara Barton at St. Petersburg in 1902, it may be that she would have
consented to retire on her return from that notable experience. It was
hardly likely that any further honor could have come to her higher than
that which she had already received. Theoretically she ought to have
been training up assistants who would act effectively in her absence,
and in time succeed her. It was in some respects a limitation on her
part that she had not found assistants to whom she could delegate
authority with confidence that it would be properly used. On the other
hand, she had made some experiments in training up associates, and
found reason to regret it.

While Clara Barton was on her way to St. Petersburg the disastrous
Mont Pelée earthquake occurred. She had left the American Red Cross
organized with a board of control which gave it authority to act
in such an emergency. She returned from St. Petersburg bitterly
disappointed because the American Red Cross played in that disaster,
as she felt, a wholly insignificant part. It seemed to her to have
displayed a complete lack of that initiative which had always
characterized her action under such conditions.

Rightly or wrongly Miss Barton felt that this inability to act promptly
and decisively was in some measure the result of a divided authority.
She thereupon set in motion an effort to amend the by-laws so as to
increase the power of the president. These changed by-laws were adopted
at the annual meeting of the American Red Cross in Washington, December
9, 1902. Clara Barton was elected president for life and given the
authority which she deemed requisite for effective action.

An earnest protest was made against Miss Barton’s increase of power,
and the disaffection increased throughout the year 1903. On January 2,
1904, President Roosevelt notified Miss Barton that he could no longer
serve as an officer of the Red Cross in the condition of unrest which
had developed.

Three weeks later, on January 29th, the minority of the American Red
Cross presented a memorial to Congress charging that under the new form
of organization practically all power was centered in the president
of the society, who was elected for life and permitted to choose her
own executive committee. A committee of investigation was appointed to
inquire into the affairs of the Red Cross. Of this committee Senator
Redfield Proctor was chairman.

It would be difficult to describe the emotions of Clara Barton when
she knew of the appointment of this committee. She was shocked and
horrified. She felt as if it had been a personal disgrace; and what
was worse, as she viewed it, she feared that it would result in a
dissension that would ruin the American Red Cross. On the other hand,
she had no mind to retire while the investigation was on. Whatever
happened, she would not resign until the investigation ended.

The committee of investigation appears to have been a very sensible
body. It set about gathering such material as it needed, and the
examination of such witnesses as were produced by the remonstrants.

The remonstrance did not contain any charges of any dishonesty on the
part of Miss Barton in the administration of the affairs of the Red
Cross; or, any charge of misappropriation of any property or money by
Miss Barton; or any improper act or conduct of any kind which involved
any element of moral turpitude.

The charges were, in brief:

(_a_) That proper books of accounts were not kept at all times; and

(_b_) that the property and funds of the Red Cross were not at all
times distributed upon the order of the treasurer of the society, as
alleged to be required by the by-laws of the society; and

(_c_) that a certain tract of land in Lawrence County, Indiana, had
been donated to the society by one Joseph Gardner; that the society
was reincorporated after such donation, and such donation was never
reported to the new corporation.

The reply to these charges, in brief, was that, in the main, proper
books of account had been kept, but, in so far as accurate books of
account had not been kept, it was due to the impossibility of keeping
them while active work was in progress on the field of disaster, and,
in so far as the by-laws of the society had not been complied with in
the making of disbursements through the treasurer, it was impossible
to do so during the stress of active relief work in the field; that so
far as the Gardner donation of Indiana land was concerned, no Red Cross
money had ever been invested in it; that the title to the real estate
was always in the Red Cross and in the then existing corporate entity
of the Red Cross, but that the land had not been found to be suited to
the work of the Red Cross and the title thereto had been allowed to
lapse because of the accumulation of taxes and charges for maintenance
which were found to be in excess of the utility of the land to the Red
Cross.[4]

The committee of investigation held three meetings, on April 12, April
26, and May 2, 1904. Clara Barton did not attend in person, but was
represented by counsel. It never became necessary for her to present
her defense. At the close of the third meeting the chairman of the
committee adjourned the hearing without day and the investigation
came to an end. The committee never presented a report; there was no
occasion to do so. The proceedings of the committee are obtainable
by any one who cares to read them, and they indicate with sufficient
clearness the reasons which presumably influenced the committee in
terminating the hearing after one side had been presented. There was no
reason why the committee needed to hear anything in defense of Clara
Barton.

The investigation having ended, Clara Barton presented her resignation
June 16, 1904. The resignation was accepted. The American Red Cross
came under its new form of organization with the President of the
United States as nominal President of the Red Cross. The committee
of the opposition had proposed that Clara Barton be made honorary
president for life with a salary to continue as long as she lived. She
did not accept either the office or the money. She retired from the Red
Cross, leaving it to the management of those who with her resignation
came into its control. Her own relation with the organization ceased
entirely.

Clara Barton was normally responsive to praise and abnormally
sensitive to criticism. In all the years of her public life she never
recovered from that supersensitiveness which had characterized her
childhood. Fulsome and excessive praise disgusted her, but she enjoyed
discriminating appreciation. Straightforward opposition she could meet
and bear, but she shrank from criticism at the hands of those who had
been her friends, and such criticism hurt her far more than any one
could imagine who beheld her self-possession and outward calm. She
seemed to the world to take opposition somewhat lightly, but she bled
within her armor from wounds which the world never suspected.

She retired from the Red Cross broken-hearted. Her common sense ought
to have saved her from nine tenths of the suffering which she endured
in that unhappy experience. She felt that she had been denationalized,
repudiated by her own country, expatriated. She thought for a time
that she could not continue to live in the United States. She turned
her eyes toward Mexico, and thought of going there partly to escape
from the sorrows which confronted her, and which she painfully
exaggerated, and partly with the thought that she might there establish
something corresponding to the American Red Cross. She had a friend
in California, Mr. Charles S. Young, who knew much about Mexico. On
January 13, 1904, after the appointment of the congressional committee
and before any of its hearings, she wrote the following letter which
came as near to being hysterical as anything that Clara Barton ever
wrote:

 You will never know how many times I have thought of you, in this last
 hard and dreadful year to me. I cannot tell you, I _must_ not, and
 yet I _must_. So much of the time, under all the persecution, it has
 seemed to me I _could not_ remain in _this_ country, and have sought
 the range of the world for some place among strangers, and out of the
 way of people and mails, and longed for some one to point out a quiet
 place in some other land; my thoughts have fled to you, who could, at
 least, tell me a road to take outside of America, and who would ask
 the authorities of Mexico if a woman who could not live in her own
 country might find a home or a resting-place in theirs.

 This will all sound very strange to you--you will wonder if I am “out
 of my mind.” Let me answer--no. And if you had only a glimpse of what
 is put upon me to endure, you would not wonder, and in the goodness of
 your heart would hold open the gate to show me a mile track to some
 little mountain nook, where I might escape and wait in peace. Don’t
 think this is _common_ talk with me. I have never said it to others;
 and yet I think they who know me best _mistrust_ that I cannot bear
 _everything_, and will try in some way to relieve myself.

 To think of sitting here through an “investigation” by the country
 I have tried to serve--“in the interest of harmony” they say, when
 I have never spoken a discordant word in my life, meaningly, but
 have worked on in _silence_ under the fire of the entire press
 of the United States for twelve months,--forgiven all, offered
 friendship,--and still am to be “investigated” for “inharmony,”
 “unbusinesslike methods,” and “too many years”--all of these I cannot
 help. I am still unanimously bidden to work on for “life,” bear
 the burden of an organization--meet its costs myself--and am now
 threatened with the expense of the “investigation.”

 Can you wonder that I ask a bridle track? And that some other country
 might look inviting to me?

 Mr. Young, this unhappy letter is a poor return to make for your
 friendly courtesy, but _so long_ my dark thoughts have turned to you
 that I cannot find myself with the privilege of communicating with
 you, without expressing them. I cannot think where I have found the
 courage to do it, but I _have_.

 I know how unwise a thing it seems, but if the pressure is too
 great the bands may break; that may be my case, and fearing that my
 better judgment might bid me put these sheets in the fire--I send
 them without once glancing over. You need not forget, but kindly
 _remember_, rather, that they are the wail of an aching heart and
 that is all. Nature has provided a sure and final rest for all the
 heartaches that mortals are called to endure.

 If you are in the East again, and I am here, I pray you to come to me.

 Receive again my thanks and permit me to remain,

  Your friend
  CLARA BARTON


In conversation she said: “The Government which I thought I loved, and
loyally tried to serve, has shut every door in my face and stared at me
insultingly through its windows. What wonder I want to leave?”

In another conversation, referring to the abandonment of her dream of
going to Mexico, she said: “There were but two countries where the Red
Cross did not exist, China and Mexico. I did not want to go to China,
but did want to go to Mexico, and fully intended to go. My friends
finally dissuaded me and perhaps it was for the best, for if I had gone
I probably would not have been alive now.”

From this distance it is possible to view the whole situation in
perspective. The present author has no hesitation in saying that the
time had come for Clara Barton to retire from the active work of the
administration of the American Red Cross. The organization had grown
well beyond the ability of any one person to manage it in the way that
Clara Barton had managed it so successfully in its earlier years.
On her return either from Cuba or St. Petersburg, she ought to have
retired, accepting the honorary presidency, and giving over the control
and active management to younger people. The author has witnessed in
not a few instances the pathetic struggle which goes on in the minds
of elderly people on their prospective retirement from positions which
have outgrown them. It is a situation nothing less than tragic. A
person long identified with an organization comes easily to believe,
either that he cannot get on without it, or that it cannot get on
without him. Clara Barton had come to believe the latter concerning the
American Red Cross. She was mistaken.

There comes a time in the life of almost any organization when, if it
is to prosper and enlarge, it must accept new leadership and adapt
itself to changed conditions. A woman as sensible as Clara Barton
was in most things should have realized this situation and not have
permitted herself to be heart-broken by a change as necessary for her
as it was for the Red Cross.

Nor is it necessary at this time to refer to the fact that the
change might perhaps have been brought about in a kindlier spirit
and with less of distress to a noble woman. If there was any lack of
consideration for her, it will do no good now to remember it, nor to
ascribe unworthy motives to any who had a share in it.

One thing, however, ought to be said concerning this tragic experience.
If Clara Barton did not bear this sorrow like a philosopher, she bore
it like a Christian. The author has searched her diaries and most
intimate papers of this period without finding in any of them any
spirit of personal resentment or desire for revenge. She felt that she
had been deeply wronged, but she felt it not so much as a wrong done
to her as an injury to the cause she loved. Her constant question was
not, What will become of me? but, What will become of the Red Cross?
Her books had been kept honestly and she knew it; but she also knew
that, when money came to her on the field, she had been accustomed to
spend it for the necessities of life for those she had come to help,
and that not all of it had passed through the hands of the treasurer.
She knew that no committee of Congress could find any of this money in
her possession, but she also knew that her system of book-keeping had
not been established with a view to a possibility of that kind of an
audit. How would it affect the Red Cross if any scandal arose out of
her unbusinesslike book-keeping?

She came in time to realize that she had taken this matter too
seriously. She came to know the relief of lessened responsibility and
to be glad that the Red Cross, with its cares and responsibilities and
widening sphere of influence, had been safely transferred to other
hands.

The author may be permitted to add a personal word. In his personal
conversation with Clara Barton concerning these unhappy events he
never heard her speak uncharitably of any of her opponents. He was not
with her during the time of the actual difficulty, and has sometimes
regretted that he was not there. Had he known all that he now knows
from months of labor spent in the examination of her most intimate
papers, he would have advised her to retire in 1898 or 1902, and to
turn over all her records to her successors, and enjoy for herself
a few years of unofficial honor before her long life closed. He did
not at that time possess the intimate knowledge which now is in his
possession, of the whole life and method of work of the American Red
Cross under her administration. He is of the opinion that she ought to
have accepted her retirement, not only willingly but gladly, and that
she was far more troubled than she had need to be concerning the events
which led to her retirement from office.

But this fact he records with sincere admiration for this noble
woman, the author’s friend and kinswoman, that in her conversation
with him in the years that followed, and in her diaries and intimate
self-revelations of her private papers, he has found no word that
seems inspired by selfish ambition, by personal resentment, or by any
unworthy motive.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] As this second volume goes to press, there is placed in my hands a
typewritten brief by General W. H. Sears, who accompanied Miss Barton
on many of her fields of service, and who, from his personal knowledge
and many compiled documents, answers in detail these charges. I have
examined this document of 162 pages with interest, but have not found
it necessary to quote from it.




CHAPTER XVI

CLARA BARTON AT HOME


Clara Barton loved a home. Although she went forth from her father’s
ample and generous house while still she was a young woman, and lived
as school-teacher, department clerk, and humanitarian for many years,
she never failed to make a home for herself if there was opportunity.
Hotel life had no charms for her, and, while she enjoyed entertainment
in the homes of her friends and was a gracious and appreciative guest,
she always preferred a roof of her own above her head where she could
be hostess rather than guest and could minister instead of being
ministered unto. While she was a clerk in Washington, she had her own
quarters to which she was accustomed to bring homeless women, girls
who lacked friendship, and others who were in need. While she was in
Europe during the Franco-Prussian War, although at times the guest of
royalty, she fled from the too abundant hospitality of her friends and
the excessive luxury of hotels, and lived in her own rented lodgings.

She owned, and kept until her death, a summer home in Oxford. But
the home of which it is especially proper to speak is that which she
erected for herself and the Red Cross, at Glen Echo, Maryland.

More than once Miss Barton had occasion to meditate on the prayer of
Peter offered on the Mount of Transfiguration, that the disciples might
be permitted to erect three tabernacles and remain with Jesus and the
spirits of the glorified saints. “Lord, it is good to be here,” is the
enthusiastic cry of those who, being caught up by the spirit of a noble
charity, see no reason why it should not continue permanently. Clara
Barton saw to it that her work was discontinued when the need for it
had passed.

When she finished her work at Johnstown, she was requested by the
lumber dealers not to give away miscellaneously the material which had
been used in the erection of her temporary Red Cross buildings. Times
were returning to normal; there was employment at good wages for every
one who wanted to work; and there was no good reason why people should
not buy their lumber or why the lumber business should be demoralized
by a thoughtless form of charity. Miss Barton knew that this was good
sense. She learned who were the people who really needed and deserved
free lumber, and these she assisted; but a portion of the lumber she
shipped to Washington and erected at Glen Echo, a few miles out from
the city, a permanent home for the American National Red Cross. Here
she made her home during the remainder of her life. Now and then she
returned for a few weeks to her summer home in Oxford, but the Red
Cross Headquarters was where she lived and moved and had her being.
There she dwelt and there she died.

It seemed to many to be far from an ideal home for her; it was a bare,
barnlike sort of place with two tiers of rooms, the upper tier opening
into a gallery as in the cabin of a steamboat. It was erected with
reference to use as a possible storehouse and emergency hospital, as
well as a central office building for the organization and a shelter
for herself and her assistants. One might have expected that a woman
who was at heart a tidy housekeeper would have preferred to put her
warehouse and office building under one sufficiently ample roof, and
to have erected for herself a little cottage adjacent; but Clara Barton
lived and died surrounded by all that went into the daily performance
of her work.

[Illustration: CLARA BARTON’S SUMMER HOUSE AT OXFORD, MASSACHUSETTS]

The author of this volume confesses to a certain chill and sinking of
heart when he first saw the interior of the Glen Echo home. He wanted
to take Clara Barton out of it and house her in a cozy little place
of her own, where for a few hours of the day she could forget the Red
Cross and all its cares. But Clara Barton gloried in those undecorated
board walls as if they had been palatial. There she hung her diplomas
and testimonials from foreign Governments as proudly as though they had
been backed by glorious tapestry of cloth of gold. Her sitting-room was
at the south of the house, overlooking the Potomac Canal; there she
worked late at night and watched the moon as it rode over the tree-tops
and reflected itself in the water. From the windows of her bedroom
just above, she habitually witnessed the sunrise. Her narrow bed was a
soldier’s cot, and beside it was a little table with a candle, a pad of
paper and a pencil. If, as often happened, she lay awake in the night,
she did not fret over her insomnia, but lighted her candle, propped
herself in bed, wrote down the good thoughts that came to her, and then
blew out the candle and went to sleep, and was refreshed for work at
five o’clock the next morning.

But there was a certain appropriateness in the construction of the
Glen Echo home. One might look down from the bare walls that had seen
service in Johnstown to find his feet on a rug presented by a Turkish
Pasha; he searched the room in vain for relics, as such, for Clara
Barton had no fondness for dust-gathering mementoes, but he could not
fail to see about him inconspicuous trophies from hard-won fields of
service. There was no luxury, but there was a simple, homely comfort
in the air of the place. The main hall of the building was two stories
high, with a gallery around the upper tier of rooms. It was a place for
service, and that service was the joy and glory of her life.

Glen Echo is on the banks of a canal along the Potomac, about eight
miles from the Capitol in Washington. This site she selected for
herself in 1890, but did not occupy it until 1897. Her reasons for
building there were that the location gave her convenient access
to Washington, with ample space and freedom for outdoor life and
opportunity for storage of Red Cross supplies without the excessive
cost which an adequate building would have required in Washington.

At the time she erected her home, a Chautauqua Assembly was in
operation in Glen Echo, and her house adjoined the grounds. Indeed,
her home was almost one of the Chautauqua buildings, the front being
of native stone such as was used in the construction of the large
auditorium and Hall of Philosophy which stood within a stone’s throw of
her house. But the stone front which was the one picturesque feature
of the house gave it a prison-like chill on the inside and had to be
removed, and the Chautauqua Assembly itself went down and gave place
to a summer amusement park. Spite of the changes in the environment,
Clara Barton kept her home at Glen Echo. A Ferris wheel was erected at
her front door; the roller-coaster went thundering by her window; the
dancing in what had been the auditorium kept up till a late hour; and
the goddess of folly with cap and bells superseded divine philosophy
in the hall dedicated to the latter; but Clara Barton lived and died in
her home in Glen Echo.

The inside of her house was not much more luxurious than the outside.
Few homes have been erected with so little attempt at display, or with
such modest provision for reasonable comfort.

In one aspect the Glen Echo home was fashioned almost like a cathedral,
but in its practical arrangement much more like a ship. It had more
windows than either a ship or a cathedral. They were almost as thick as
they could be placed and leave any room for walls, but they were very
plain windows, except that one on the stairs had a little inexpensive
ornamentation and the glass in the two front doors had a red cross in
each.

The front door faced north and led into a long wide hall, cool in
summer, cold in winter, with an elongated oval well, railed round on
the two upper floors, so that from the main deck one looked up to the
upper deck and the boat deck of the ship-like building. This central
three-deck cabin was ceiled with unpainted wood, not unattractive
but unadorned. Doors opened on either side at regular intervals, and
between the doors were deep closets where blankets, Horlick’s Malted
Milk, canned goods and emergency supplies of various kinds were duly
stored and catalogued. If a fire or a flood broke out in any part of
the country, Clara Barton was ready to start and had something with
which to begin relief.

It was this attempt to combine in one a home, a storehouse, a place of
refuge for the needy, and a kind of organization headquarters which
struck the visitor so strangely and almost repellently. She might have
built a little bungalow for herself and her offices and housed her
supplies in a separate building erected for storage purposes and with
emergency sleeping-rooms attached, but she wished it otherwise and she
had her way.

If the reader had been privileged to visit Clara Barton there during
her lifetime and had made his way down the rather long cabin to her own
quarters in the south end of this ship-like cathedral, he would have
found Clara Barton at home. It would have made little difference how
early or how late the call was made. She was up with the sun and often
before, weeding her garden, feeding her chickens, caring for her pets,
and looking after her house. She rarely went to bed before midnight.
Fourteen to eighteen hours a day of work she did steadily until her
death.

Let us suppose that she has an important address to deliver to-morrow
night. This is the way she prepares for it. She rises at five this
morning and does her own room work. Her bedding is aired, her bed is
made, and the carpet sweeper is rolling over her floor before six
o’clock gives its warning to other members of the household. She eats
a simple breakfast with her household and guests and wastes no time,
but still is in no haste about it. She gives no intimation that she is
in a hurry, and enjoys the breakfast-table conversation, evincing a
keen sense of humor and a hearty interest in all human happenings. She
announces that she has attended to her most important correspondence
for the morning, and excuses herself to see to the ways of her
household. It is the day her curtains are to be washed, and she has to
superintend affairs in the laundry and make some changes in her garden.
She puts in very nearly the whole day in physical labor. She knows
well how to direct the work of others, but she does not scorn to take
the flatiron or the garden trowel in her own hands and show how she
wants things done. Moreover, she gets things done the way she wants
them. That is a habit of hers.

She lingers after the luncheon and evening meal and engages in cheerful
conversation. Instrumental music has no charm for her, but good
singing she enjoys if there is a distinct melody and if the words mean
something. She likes to hear men sing better than she likes to hear
women, and she likes the songs she knows, and is willing to hear them
again and again. If among the guests is one who sings, she is a good
listener. But the greater part of the evening is spent in conversation.
Clara Barton was a good conversationalist. She could listen without
restlessness and talk without monopolizing the privilege of talking.
She was quick to see a point. She had a voice which was low, and while
not sweet or musical was pleasant, and its cadences were those of the
gentlewoman. Her sentences were always perfectly formed. Her grammar
never needed apology; her speech was precise, but free from pedantry.
Her talk was habitually cheerful. She was respectful of the opinions of
others and never failed to have an opinion of her own.

After her guests have gone to bed, her light still burns. She sits
in her south room, where she said it seemed as if “it was always
moonlight,” and in her work she enjoyed the companionship of the
woods, the stars, and the many voices of the night. Even the racket
of the dancing and the whirl of the merry-go-round with the joyously
frightened squeals of the girls descending the roller-coaster was far
less objectionable than it would have been if it had been her habit to
retire early.

But she is not yet working on her address. She is taking care of the
belated mail which the day has brought and which her duties in the
garden and laundry have kept her from attending to, but she has been
thinking about the address more or less during the day, although when
midnight comes she has not written a word of it. Beside her bed,
however, she places a candle, a pencil, and a pad.

Clara Barton’s bed was a cot. It was not a very soft cot either.
She was never a poor woman. From her father she inherited a modest
patrimony, and she always had more than enough money of her own to
supply her needs. She could have had a wide and soft bed if she had
wanted it. She had just what she wanted, and she never cared to have
people tell her that she ought to have things differently in so far as
they related to her own comfort.

Do not think she was an ascetic or slept in a hard bed because she
scorned bodily comfort. Comfort she had and exactly as much of it as
she wanted. Luxury she did not want. She thanked no one for wasting any
pity upon her. Her bed was as wide as she wished it, and as soft as she
cared to have it, and in it she slept soundly and was refreshed.

Before it was light she woke and reached for her matches and her
pencil, and sitting up in bed she wrote her address as fully as she
cared to have it written. She rarely erased a word. Her mind was clear
and her speech came to her just in the form in which she wished it. Her
years of training as a school-teacher had laid well the foundations of
her composition and rhetoric. She wrote, not rapidly, but accurately,
and each word said exactly what she wanted to say.

Her address is finished before daylight, and she puts out the light and
takes her final nap, but is up at her accustomed time, having enjoyed
a good night’s rest, and is out in the garden and looking after the
poultry until she joins her guests at breakfast.

After breakfast she copies her address in ink. Her handwriting is like
copper-plate. When it is copied, she lays it aside. The process of
copying it has photographed it upon her mind. She can deliver it either
with or without manuscript. Although she trembles at the sight of an
audience, she has learned to face one with perfect composure and no
word of her speech escapes her memory.

Perhaps she excuses herself from lunch to-day and works at her desk,
but not at the speech she is to deliver. It is her habit to keep free
from any needless accumulation of unfulfilled duties. She sees her
guests at the table and is herself within call, but for herself she has
ordered an apple, a slice of bread, and a piece of cheese. No member of
her household will suggest to her that she ought to eat more, and if
one of her guests feels some compunction at eating a more ample repast
while her hostess dines on homely fare, it is better that she keep her
compunction to herself. If the guest should rise from the table and
walk into the other room, carrying some delicacy, she would meet a mild
rebuke. “I asked for exactly what I wanted,” Clara would say.

Outside the window at which she sits the mason wasps build their nests
of mud. Woe unto the man who molests them! The sparrow finds a house
and the swallow a nest in the shelter of the Lord of hosts, and the
wasps are as welcome as the birds to a home at Glen Echo. Two or
three wasps fly through the open window and light upon her half-eaten
apple. She will not permit them to be driven away. There is enough for
the wasps and for herself. Like Saint Francis and the birds, she is
at home with every kind of gentle life, and the wasps, she maintains,
are gentle if gently treated. She gently pushes them away from her
apple when she is ready for another bite, cutting off a piece with her
desk-knife and leaving it on the corner of her desk for the wasps. They
also have a further portion in the core. They light upon her hand, her
forehead, they buzz round her, but they never sting her. She and they
are friends.

This is the kind of life Clara Barton lived in Glen Echo; and this is
what those were privileged to see who visited her in her home.




CHAPTER XVII

CLARA BARTON’S RELIGION


Clara Barton was a religious woman. Her diaries, her home letters,
her intimate confidences, all breathe a deeply religious spirit.
But she was reserved concerning her personal religious feelings and
convictions. Once, when she was abruptly asked by a stranger in a group
of strangers what were her religious opinions, she answered that she
could not undertake to answer so large a question in so short a time.
She recorded this in her diary, with some resentment that she should
have been called upon thus to stand and deliver at sight.

But sitting beside a dying soldier, she had no hesitation in praying
with him, nor of telling him unreservedly her own faith in God and
immortality.

She was reared a Universalist. In that faith she lived the greater part
of her life. She did not, however, join the Universalist Church in her
home town, and she went away quite early and never established personal
relations with a church.

Her satisfaction in church-going was almost wholly in the sermon. For
music she did not care, and there was nothing in ritual that appealed
to her. But a well-reasoned sermon she enjoyed. Henry Ward Beecher was
her favorite preacher, and she did not miss an opportunity of hearing
him if she could help it. A truly great sermon or great address of any
kind made a strong impression upon her; nor was it wholly intellectual.
She was remarkably receptive and open to spiritual impressions.
A woman of intellect and will, she was also a woman of unusually
sensitive feelings and of deep, though controlled, emotions. She was
ever eager to learn and had to the end of her life unshaken faith in
the discovery and application of new truth.

It was reported in 1908 that Clara Barton had gone over to Christian
Science. The report was not wholly correct. She became interested
in Christian Science, but she never adopted it. The minister of the
Universalist Church in Oxford, the Reverend Mr. Schoppe, became a
Christian Science practitioner and reader, and she was much interested
through him and his wife in this change on his part.

She was interested in Mrs. Eddy. It seemed to her a notable thing for
a woman, alone and against great opposition, to have accomplished what
she did.

She once witnessed the wreck of a sight-seeing automobile filled with
Christian Science visitors to Boston, and she was impressed by the
fortitude with which they bore pain.

Moreover, she had good reason to know that there is much reckless
use of medicine and much needless surgery. She had memories of years
in which she suffered many things of many physicians and was nothing
better, but rather worse. She saw, in war and in peace, much use of
the knife that seemed to her bloody and cruel. She saw women hurrying
to the operating-table, sometimes, as she believed, for no better
reason than to escape the risk of motherhood, and she scorned them. She
expressed herself to me in terms anything but gentle concerning married
women who willingly deprive themselves of the perilous privilege of
motherhood by resort to surgery. She believed that people who take
medicine usually take too much; and that cheerful and wholesome living
is better than medicine.

Moreover, she was always ready for a thing that was new. Her delight in
the discovery of something hidden and now revealed was intense.

For all these reasons she was disposed to give Christian Science a fair
hearing.

In Dr. Epler’s excellent biography, free use is made of Miss Barton’s
correspondence with Mr. and Mrs. Schoppe, in which she expressed her
interest in their new faith. My own conviction is, that while Clara
Barton was thus deeply interested, those letters tend to enlarge the
degree of her permanent interest. I am confident that she was less
near to being a Christian Scientist than the letters themselves would
indicate if taken alone. Indeed, Mr. Schoppe himself gives what I think
is a wholly truthful statement, as recorded by Mr. Epler, under date of
December 17, 1914:

 Clara Barton’s connecting point with Christian Science was on the
 positives it accented--not from its negative philosophy. She welcomed
 its doctrine of the Divine presence of God working with us and in us
 and working upon her own life--present to help. She was exceedingly
 grateful to Christian Science for bringing out this point of the
 Divine absoluteness.

 Further than that she could not understand it; she could not go.
 She did not deny, but she believed (unlike the Christian Science
 negativism) in a perfectly vast realm of material and human progress.
 She traced it in the wonders of geological ages and historical
 evolution. She saw God’s handiwork in a colossal complex material
 creation. She never could bring herself to believe the material or
 human creation a mortal error!

I regard this as wholly correct. She read “Science and Health” and
endeavored to use the “absent treatment” of the Schoppes. The first
night it seemed to do good, and the next night the effect was gone. Her
effort to obtain whatever was good in Christian Science was sincere;
but her experiments did not make her a Christian Scientist.

She employed physicians till the day of her death, and took medicine.
But she believed that spiritual things are the real things, and that
man is more than body.

The two ministers whom she selected to have charge of her funeral in
the old home in Oxford were both Congregationalists. The Reverend
Percy H. Epler was chosen for his long friendship, and the Reverend
William E. Barton for that and for his kinship. She did not choose, but
would have been happy to have chosen, had her plans been worked out in
detail, the Reverend Doctor Tyler, an aged minister of the Universalist
faith, to have a share in the services. Happily, he was present, and
did participate. He had baptized and buried whole generations of the
Oxford Bartons, and it was a benediction to have him standing, like a
patriarch, above her coffin, and speaking words of comfort and hope.

Her choice of Congregational ministers to perform this service did
not imply a lack of honor for the church of her childhood. Yet, in
some respects, her associations in later years were more intimate with
Congregationalists than with Universalists.

I have no reason to suppose that she talked with any one more freely
than she talked with me about her religion, or about her relations to
the Universalist Church. I think I can represent her views essentially
as they were.

She continued to believe all that was essential in the faith which she
had been taught in the church of Hosea Ballou. She trusted in a God
whom she believed too great and good to make an eternal hell necessary
to his government. If God was infinite and also desired the salvation
of all men, if He was not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come unto Him and live; if Christ tasted death for every man;
then, as it seemed to her, ultimately, sin must be eliminated from
the moral universe and with sin must go punishment. She believed, not
only with Ballou, but with Beecher, that God will not punish after
punishment ceases to do good. That sin brings punishment she believed
and knew, but that sin and punishment must go on eternally seemed
to her to imply either that God was not wholly good or not wholly
Sovereign.

Her Universalism was essentially Calvinistic; it was based on the
sovereignty of God. She believed that God was great enough to

    “treasure up his bright designs,
  And work his sovereign will.”

She believed in the divinity of Christ. She was not a Unitarian. But
she held to Christ’s divinity as a divinity of preëminence and not
of exclusion. She believed that Jesus became the Son of God by moral
processes which are essentially within the reach of men, “that He might
be the first-born among many brethren.”

I think I can give a truthful impression about her feeling with regard
to Universalism as an independent ecclesiastical organization. She
talked freely with me about this, and expressed the definite wish that
the Universalist Church and the Congregational Church might everywhere
be reunited. She had something of the same feeling with regard to the
Unitarian churches. She loved the memory of Theodore Parker, whom
she sometimes felt she recognized as guiding her long years after
his death. She honored him, and other of the Unitarian men of his
generation. She felt that both Unitarianism and Universalism had been
necessary protests against the immoral orthodoxy of the time of their
origin.

But she felt that that protest was no longer needed, at least to the
same extent. She felt the waste of competing religious organizations.
The Universalist Church was the church of her father, but the
Congregational Church was the church of his fathers. She had more
friends in the latter than in the former. She told me she would be glad
to see the liberty of thought which Universalism had stood for sacredly
preserved in a union of those denominations.

She said, “What I see in Oxford I see everywhere, a need that churches
shall forget old and past disputes, and come into more compact
organization, merging denominations, and preserving religious liberty.”

It is a hazardous thing to repeat, after years have gone by, the
impressions left by oral conversations. Yet I am confident that in this
meager outline I give her essential faith.

She did not talk glibly about her faith. But it was very real, and very
definite, and it remained with her to the end.

Concerning revivals of religion she wrote to a niece who, in the
widespread religious interest awakened by Mr. Moody in the seventies,
had been asked by an evangelist to take a step which, as she looked
back upon it, implied more than she had intended:

  Thursday night

 If one acts with good intentions, believing they are doing rightly,
 and later, concludes it was unwise or wrong--there is a mistake
 somewhere, or has been. It may have been in the act, or it may be in
 the later conclusion, but it is only a mistake, not a sin, you poor
 little chick.

 Another time when you are requested in prayer meeting to act on a
 double question, the putter of it mixing up your desire or willingness
 to stand up before an audience and be made a subject for public
 prayers with an act of personal courtesy or discourtesy to himself as
 to whether you want to hear him or _not_, once leaves you free to vote
 as you like, and then comes and questions your decision, and asks your
 reason,--if you feel like answering him at all,--tell him to divide
 his questions, put one at a time and you will act on each separately.
 He put two questions together, as a dodge to get all up to be prayed
 for, thinking and knowing it put every one in a hard place, as all
 would see that it was a little impolite not to hasten to accept his
 offer to come and preach. Oh, how tricky.

 You have done rightly in it all, my dear little girl. When he asked
 why you did not side with the Lord you answered that you did. That
 was right and all he could ask for. When he added, “Then why did you
 not rise and kneel,” you might tell him you did not understand that
 request as coming from the Lord, or you should certainly have done so.

 I send you a “Banner of Light” to-day. You will find two articles
 bearing on your subject--the one a lecture by a good sturdy Briton on
 Mr. Moody’s sermon on “Hell.” I think you will read it with interest
 just now, and every time you get assaulted in public prayer meeting,
 and followed by men, I should advise you to run home and calm your
 hysterical nerves by re-reading that lecture from end to end.

 The other longer marked article on “Revivalism” is a fine sermon by
 a sound Unitarian clergyman who does not believe in special revivals
 of religion, as gotten up for the occasion, and to fill churches, but
 thinks religion, as being the best part of man’s nature, will revive
 itself like all else in nature, and feels that God does not need to
 be implored to save from endless pain and loss the poor creatures He
 has made, but believes that if we do our best to enlighten and elevate
 those around us we do all we are called upon to do in the way of their
 salvation.

 But read it well and carefully for yourself, or read it again with Ida
 and “reason together” about it and see if you can find in your own
 convictions some justification for the course you are taking with the
 S.S. There is much to be read, before you decide, much to learn and
 consider; take time and do it and don’t either fall into a trap nor be
 driven into one.--Selah!

She retained to the end of her life a high regard for the church of her
fathers, the Universalist Church. Of it she wrote to Mrs. Jennie S. M.
Vinton at Oxford:

 I am glad to learn by your valued letter of September 5th that the
 old church of our fathers is about to be refitted and I thank you for
 the information. It is thoughtful of you to name the facts of the
 early history of the church which I am happy to corroborate, both by
 tradition and recollection. My father was present at the ordination
 sermon of Hosea Ballou (a white-headed boy he seemed). He was one of
 the pillars of the church. His family came over the hills of extreme
 North Oxford, five miles every Sunday, to sit in its high pews. When
 I was a grown young woman it was decided to build the present church,
 and no body of church people ever worked harder than we. We held
 fairs, public and home, begged, and gave all but the clothes we wore;
 we cleaned windows and scrubbed paint after workmen, bought and nailed
 down carpets, fitted up the parsonage, and received the bride of the
 Reverend Albert Barnes, our first settled pastor. And I carried their
 first baby to the christening.

 There are few people there who have memories of harder church work and
 better church love than I.

 Think this over, dear sister, and remember that I have never lost my
 love for the old church of my fathers, my family, and my childhood.

She believed whole-heartedly in immortality. Not only so, but she
believed that her friends were near. She never recovered from the
impression that came to her, after the death of her brother Stephen,
that he was an influence, a living influence, for good in her life.
That influence was exerted directly. As she woke in the morning while
it was yet dark, and faced the duties of the day, she was able to think
and plan with such clarity of vision that she felt that she was helped
by the presence of those whom she had loved and who had counseled her
in life. Through Stephen she felt the influence of her mother, as she
believed, and, less directly, that of her father. She said, “I do not
believe I am a Spiritualist,” but she could not shake off, and did not
desire to shake off, the conviction that those whom she had loved were
near her.

The latest, and in some respects the most satisfactory, statement of
her faith, was written a year before her death, to Judge A. W. Terrell,
of Austin, Texas:

 I suppose I am not what the world denominates a church woman. I lay
 no claim to it. I was born to liberal views, and have lived a liberal
 creed. I firmly believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ, the Jesus of
 Nazareth; in His life and death of suffering to save the world from
 sin, so far as in His power to do. But it would be difficult for me
 to stop there and believe that this spark of divinity was accorded to
 none other of God’s creation, who, like the Master, took on the living
 form, and, like him, lived the human life.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE PERSONALITY OF CLARA BARTON


At the beginning of her public career, Clara Barton was short of
stature and slender as she was short. Her form rounded out in middle
life, but she never exhibited any approach to stoutness. She was so
well proportioned as to give the impression of being taller than she
was. When she spoke in public, if she stood beside a presiding officer,
it was seen that she was small of stature, but when she stood alone,
she gave the impression of being, and was often described as being,
above medium height. Her maximum height, attained in adolescence,
was five feet two inches in moderately high-heeled shoes. The author
measured her in her later years, and she was exactly five feet tall
without her shoes.

Her carriage was erect, except for a slight stoop in the shoulders.
There never came any sag in her person, any letting down of her erect
standing. Her spine below the shoulders was carried to the end of her
life as erect as in youth. As she stood or sat, she never had the
bearing of an old person. When seated, she commonly kept her back well
away from the back of the chair, depending upon nothing external to
assist her in maintaining her erect bearing.

She walked quietly, deliberately, and flat-footedly. She put her whole
foot down at once. There was a certain firmness in her gait which
indicated strength of character and resolute purpose. She did not dart
or rush or drift or flutter; she walked, and her walk was of moderate
speed and of marked decision.

Her hair was brown, and in her younger days she had great wealth of it.
She took good care of it; and, while there was less of it in her later
years, it retained its fine texture, its soft silky wave, and its rich
brown color. The writer asked her once if she had a single gray hair.
She replied that she thought she had one, but had forgotten just where
it was.

Her eyes were brown, and in some lights appeared black. I find at least
one description of her as she appeared on the lecture platform in which
she was described as tall, with hair and eyes black as the raven’s
wing. The reporter is not to be blamed for his departure from truth.
She looked tall when she stood alone, and her eyes and hair appeared as
he described them, when seen in some lights.

Her features were regular. Her nose was prominent and straight. Her
mouth was large, and very expressive. Her features were remarkably
mobile. Her forehead was both high and wide, and in her middle life
she wore her hair so that its full breadth and height appeared beneath
the graceful parting of the hair. In her later years her hair was
combed down over the temples on either side, and remained parted in the
middle. Her chin was a very firm chin. It did not protrude, neither did
it recede. There was not the slightest suggestion of a lantern-jaw;
but there was a clear-cut prominence of the chin that suggested a firm
decision and a tenacious purpose. She said to the writer, “Every true
Barton knows how to possess an open mind and teachable disposition with
a firmness that can be obstinate if necessary, and no one can be more
obstinate than a Barton.” Obstinate she certainly could be, but she
was reasonable to a marked degree. No one who saw her shut her mouth
when she had made a decision could cherish any doubt of her tenacity of
purpose; and her chin was anything but a weak one.

She did not stare, but she had a habit of fixing her eyes upon an
object or a person which did not put arrogance or pretense at ease.
She could, on occasion, look through a person as if she discerned his
inmost thoughts. But ordinarily her look into one’s face was gentle and
companionable and sympathetic.

Clara Barton affected none of the arts by which women advanced in years
attempt to appear young. On the other hand, she had no intention of
growing old. She said to me that she did not see why people should be
so curious about anybody’s age; what did it matter? So far as she was
concerned, there was no secret about it; but when people had learned
the date of her birth, how could they know whether she was old or young?

She did not greatly like to be asked for her “latest photograph.” The
photograph which she liked best, the one which she had framed and which
the author has just as it stood on her desk, was the familiar Civil War
portrait.

On December 30, 1910, she wrote in her diary, concerning her friend,
Julia Ward Howe, whose death she mourned, and whose biography she had
read through with keen interest:

 I notice a strife over the placing of Mrs. Howe’s portrait in Fanueil
 Hall. The art committee object to it, but the people demand that it
 be placed there. No reasons on the part of the art committee are yet
 given. The painting is by Mr. Elliott, husband of Maude. I wonder at
 the idea of people having their pictures taken after time and age
 have robbed them of all their characteristic features. I regard this
 as a mistake. I want the last picture of the friends I love to show
 them in their strength and at their best. Mrs. Howe’s picture as now
 painted would have shocked even herself in strong middle life. Why not
 show the world the writer of the “Battle Hymn of the Republic” as she
 was when she wrote it? Is it the rush of the curious for the “latest
 photo”? I think the idea wrong. I wish the art committee would insist
 on a picture of Mrs. Howe at the age of forty years.

When Clara Barton was in her eighties, she often, as was her custom,
would sit upon the floor, _à la_ Turk, with her work spread around her.
When her work was finished, she would rise, with the suppleness of a
girl, without touching her hands to the floor.

She had an almost morbid shrinking from the infliction of pain, or from
the taking of life. She was not strictly a vegetarian. If she was at
another’s table and meat was offered her, she ate it sparingly.

She carried through life a pulse ten beats slower to the minute than
that of an ordinary woman of her years, but her pulse beat steadily
and reliably. A half-cup of coffee stimulated her almost to the point
of intoxication, and a child’s dose of medicine was too much for her.
So simply did she live that when she died at the age of ninety-one
there was not a physical lesion, not a diseased organ in her body. Her
physician, who for thirty years had been her almost daily companion,
Dr. J. B. Hubbell, declared that, barring accident, or some acute
attack, such as that which actually caused her death, she could easily
have lived to be one hundred years of age and still not have been
technically old.

There was nothing about her voice or manner that suggested a really
aged person. Senility was farther removed from her at ninety than from
most women at sixty. A California octogenarian was compiling a book of
personal testimonies by aged people and wrote to her asking for the
secret of her long life. Her answer was contained in four words, “Low
fare, hard work.” If to this she had added anything, it should have
been a self-forgetful purpose, a serene spirit, and an upholding faith.

From her father Clara Barton inherited a spirit of broad philanthropy
and wide human interest. From her mother she inherited a warm heart and
a very hot temper. It was this temper that gave her self-control. She
kept it perfectly under her bidding, and that lowered voice was the
sign of mighty resolution and smouldering passion under the control of
a conquering will.

Clara Barton was a lifelong believer in woman’s suffrage. She was a
close friend and a warm admirer of Susan B. Anthony, and shared her
aims and hopes for her sex. She believed in women receiving the same
wages as men for the same work. She was never as militant an advocate
of the rights of women as Miss Anthony, however. Temperamentally she
was of quite another disposition. In her later years she saw with
marked disapproval what she regarded as the unwomanly efforts of women
to advance their cause. This she believed hurt the cause more than it
helped it, and whether it helped or hurt she did not like it.

A lady who was about to undertake a long journey by rail spoke to Clara
Barton of her dread of it. Railway travel, she said, always tired her
out and made her sick. Miss Barton said, “Travel rests me.”

Her friend asked her how she managed it. She replied:

“I delegate to the conductor and the engineer the full responsibility
for the running of the train. I do not overeat, nor take with me candy
or other needless food to upset my digestion just when I am getting
less than my usual exercise. I carry with me a book and a note-book.
When I think of something that I want to remember, I jot it down; when
I see something that interests me, I make note of it. I read as long
as I enjoy reading; and when I grow tired of that, I close my eyes and
rest, and let the train go on.”

Her friend replied, “That all sounds very simple; I will try it.”

She returned from her journey, reporting that she had had a delightful
time, and that she had alighted from the train at each end of the trip
less weary than when she started.

The directions which Clara Barton gave were those which she herself had
tested.

Clara Barton lived long, and her life had many changes. Account has
been given of certain episodes in her young womanhood in which she was
loved and did not return the affection of the men who loved her. The
question has been asked and should be answered whether in her later
years she had any experience which made up for the lack of love in
her youth. Some stories, nearly or quite apocryphal, have been told
concerning the men who are supposed to have loved her and whom she
loved, but whom she refused because she loved her work more.

The lovers of her youth were all good, worthy men, as good as the
average New Englander. There is nothing to be said concerning any one
of them that is not to his credit; but no one of them was the equal of
Clara Barton. There was no tragedy about her experience, neither was
there any consciousness of the ecstasy of a love completely possessing
her. These affairs left her something of loneliness, but no memory of
bitter grief or cruel disappointment. She could write, and did once
write, some tender, sentimental verses about a sad parting, but the
sadness did not break her heart, nor permanently cloud that of any of
her lovers.

The time came when all this was changed. She lived in Washington, amid
a wide circle of friends, among them men of every station in life. No
longer was she possessed of ambition beyond that of any man of her
age and acquaintance. There were men whom she knew and men whom she
liked, who had ambitions equal to her own and ideals with which her
own had much in common. During the Civil War she might have chosen any
one of scores of grateful men, as her husband. But she seems hardly
to have given matrimony a thought in those years. After she became
famous, she was less readily accessible to any multitude of lovers,
but at least one man to whom she had been kind sought to reward her
with his heart and hand, and, after she had returned from Europe, at
least one man whom she met abroad pressed upon her his ardent and
unrewarded affections. If she had married any one, she would have
married an American. No offer of matrimony from a man not of her own
land would seem to have made any appeal to her. This offer of marriage
she regarded rather with amusement than with serious consideration. It
was honorable, but in her judgment most unsuitable, and she refused
with a smile,--not the smile of contempt, but of good-humor and healthy
merriment.

Among other friends in middle life there were two whom she would seem
to have considered in the aspect of possible lovers.

In the days during and following the Civil War, she came to know
intimately an American professor of wide repute, who at that time was
pursuing extended researches in Washington. He was a widower of about
her own age, a profound scholar, and he became a dear and trusted
friend. For several months their paths were thrown together and for
a time they boarded at the same table. She was interested, not only
in his work, but in himself. The ardor and enthusiasm with which he
worked impressed her. Like herself, he was little bound by precedent,
and was engaged in a task which he confidently believed would increase
the sum of human learning. There was something in a task of this
character that made a direct appeal to Clara Barton. Much as she prized
any kind of useful knowledge, she especially admired the spirit of
the pioneer, and honored the man who blazed new paths and widened the
horizons of learning. Such a man was this friend of hers. He read to
her in many evenings the results of his investigation, and she shared
his enthusiasm for his task. Her two nephews, Bernard and Sam, then in
Washington, were wont to poke quiet fun at him and to joke their aunt
about the possibility of his becoming an uncle of theirs and swamping
the family with his knowledge of subjects which the boys cared little
about. She took their raillery in good part. But one day, when she
thought it had gone a little too far, she reproved her nephews and made
a spirited defense of the professor. She said, “You need not wonder
that, notwithstanding all your attempts to make fun of him, I admire
a man of his profound learning and high character.” Her nephews then
believed that their respect for each other had merged into affection,
but, as the years went by and he and Clara gradually lost sight of
each other, they came to think that they might have been mistaken,
that the two were good friends and nothing more. So far as the author
is aware, there exists no evidence from which an answer can be had to
the question of how much they really cared for each other, or, if they
cared, why they did not marry. The author has his own conjecture, and
it is only a conjecture, but it is this: Both he and she were at that
time at the beginnings of a great work. How long either one would need
to continue to labor and sacrifice before success was won, neither
could determine.

The last and in some respects the most interesting, as certainly the
most distinguished, among Clara Barton’s matrimonial possibilities,
came to her late in life. During the Civil War she became acquainted
with a man who even then was held in high regard, and was attracting
the attention of his own State and to some extent of the Nation. Rising
largely by his own exertions to a position of eminence, he became one
of the leading men of the generation. Through all the years when she
was pursuing her war relief work, with scant appropriation for postage,
he cheerfully loaned her his frank and was her friend. Through many
long years they knew each other and always held each other in esteem.
He was in Washington and so was she, and there was little need of
interchange of letters between them; nor is there in the letters that
are preserved any indication of personal affection. Those letters
grew out of particular events when one or the other of them was away
from Washington, and for the most part they had no significance as
indicating the extent to which they may have cared for each other.

But there came a time when his work and her work brought them into
close and more constant relations. They were both at the zenith of
their respective careers. At that time he was a widower. Both were free
and they could have married without the sacrifice of any important
interest. The home which they might have established would have been a
congenial one.

At that time Clara Barton took a brief vacation and went to Oxford
where she prepared a new wardrobe, including a white satin dress. To
her niece Mamie she confided that an occasion of unusual significance
was in prospect, and that more would be known of it later.

Just at this time this distinguished statesman died. His death was a
great shock to Clara Barton. She made no public lamentation; she never
hinted even to those who were nearest to her that her grief was other
than that which she might properly feel for an honored friend of many
years. Her nieces believed that his death prevented their marriage. Her
nephew, Stephen, says:

 Their friendship was long and intimate, and it would not have been
 strange if they had cared for each other. In many respects their lives
 would have been well adapted to each other. But if their regard for
 each other ever expressed itself in terms of love, or approached the
 prospect of marriage, I do not know it. It may have seemed to either
 or both of them a pleasant possibility, but they were mature people,
 each with a great work to do; and if his death cut short what was
 growing from friendship into love, I do not know it. Such a feeling
 either one of them might very worthily have held toward the other. I
 know that she held him as a dear and trusted and honored friend, and
 he esteemed her likewise.

If Clara Barton loved this able and good man, she bore her
disappointment as she was accustomed to bear her disappointments,
in self-restrained and dignified silence. Her silence shall remain
unbroken. If they loved, it was a love worthy of them both; if they
were good friends and only good friends, it was a friendship honorable
to both.

So far as the author has been able to learn from those who were closest
to Clara Barton during her lifetime, and so far as it is disclosed by
her diary and letters, this is all there is to be known concerning the
love affairs of Clara Barton.

There were times when Clara Barton felt keenly her isolation. But, in
1911, she recorded in her diary some of the domestic trials of some of
her friends, and added, “After all, _Aloneness_ is not the worst thing
in the world.”

While extremely modest, Clara Barton was far from being a prude. She
was never terrified by appeals to respectability, nor could she be
frightened by any warning concerning men or women whom gossip condemned.

In 1884, when she was on her steamboat, _Joseph V. Throop_, assisting
in the Ohio River floods, the boat one night tied up at a landing, and
a goodly number of people came on board. Among the rest were two young
women. One of the prominent ladies of the town found opportunity to
whisper to her that these were young women whose social standing was
not above question. “Then they will need help all the more,” she said;
and she gave those two girls an hour of her evening. Such warnings
she often received, and, far from accepting them as her basis of
discrimination, she invariably reacted in the other direction.

She never undertook any work without first carefully thinking it
through in an effort to discover just where it was to end and how it
was to be provided for. She had no sympathy with people who start good
movements for other people to support when their well-meant but poorly
reckoned endeavor fails. “They get hold of a log they can’t lift,” she
said, “and they make a great call for some one to come and lift it for
them.” That was never the way in which she did things. She thought them
through in advance.

Clara Barton worked slowly. While she formed her decisions promptly in
emergencies, she formulated them carefully and with painful precision.
It was not by doing things easily she accomplished so much, but by
rising early and working late and keeping constantly at the thing she
wanted to do. She attempted to use stenographic assistance, but with
only moderate success. She had to work out her letters and addresses
in her own way. A certain kind of routine work her secretaries did for
her, to her great relief, but her real work she had to do herself.

She coveted the ability to work more rapidly. She admired that ability,
and perhaps overvalued it, in others. She once wrote to me: “Where do
you find time to do so many things? One of the griefs of my life is to
see other persons getting things done--really _done_--and I accomplish
so little. I don’t see how they do it.”

No more could they see how she did it; but she did it by working with
an industry and devotion that never found an easy way of accomplishing
results.

A friend of hers was deeply interested in a movement for which he
wished the endorsement of Clara Barton. She believed in the work he was
doing, and was willing to commend it; but she wanted to know a little
more about it, and then she wanted time to think out what she wanted
to say about it. He became very desirous of having her commendation
in time for a particular use; and his wife invited Clara Barton to
their home to dine. She willingly accepted, and enjoyed the visit. She
knew the family, and held them in high esteem. After dinner, and some
conversation, the man produced a typewritten statement of some length
which he had prepared, endorsing his work. This he read to her, and she
liked it. But when she understood that he had prepared this for her to
sign, she was shocked. She refused to sign it.

Her friend could not at first understand her scruples. Did she not
believe in this work? She did. Had she not expressed to him her
approval and signified her willingness to furnish him a statement which
he would be at liberty to publish? She had. Had she not listened to his
reading of this very statement with expressions of hearty approval?
She had. Was there anything in it she would like to change? If so, she
was at liberty to make any erasure or interlineation she desired. No;
there was nothing she cared to change, except that she cared to change
everything in it.

He assured her that he was asking nothing of her which men of the
highest honor did not do constantly; that in a busy world people had
to avail themselves of assistance such as he offered her; that his own
standards of honor were high, and he would never think of asking her
to sign a statement which did not fully express her own convictions.

All this she understood, and she did not censure him. But she could
not do what he asked of her. The statement which he had prepared was
not hers. The opinions expressed were in full accord with her own, and
the language was as good as any she could have chosen, and there was
nothing in the document to which she could object; but it was not hers.

Her idea of a document which she could sign as her own was one which
she should have thought out on first wakening, perhaps in the middle
of the night, and sketched in pencil on the pages of the little pad at
the head of her bed, and then thoughtfully copied in her own hand with
careful weighing of each word and phrase. That would have been her own.

Certainly that was a needlessly narrow conception of the extent to
which she might honorably have employed the minds and willing hands of
others in her own too heavy toil. But it was a conception grounded in
the highest possible conviction of honor.

Clara Barton was a self-willed woman. So was Mother Bickerdyke. So was
Dorothea Dix. So, most emphatically and uncomfortably for those who
withstood her, was Florence Nightingale. If comparisons were in order,
which they certainly are not, she was not the least considerate of the
four of other people’s opinion, nor most reluctant to admit herself in
the wrong. Like Florence Nightingale, she had opportunities of marriage
in her youth, and resolutely turned to other work under force of a
strong conviction, and that conviction had mighty impelling power.
Lytton Strachey, in his remarkably penetrating sketch, says:

 Every one knows the popular conception of Florence Nightingale.
 The saintly, self-sacrificing woman, the delicate maiden of high
 degree who threw aside the pleasures of a life of ease to succor the
 afflicted, the Lady with the Lamp, gliding through the horrors of
 the hospital at Scutari, and consecrating with the radiance of her
 goodness the dying soldier’s couch--the vision is familiar to all.
 But the truth was different. The Miss Nightingale of fact was not as
 facile as fancy painted her. She worked in another fashion, and toward
 another end; she moved under the stress of an impetus which finds no
 place in the popular imagination. A Demon possessed her. Now demons,
 whatever else they may be, are full of interest. And so it happens
 that in the real Miss Nightingale there was more that was interesting
 than in the legendary one; there was also less that was agreeable.

The disposition of Florence Nightingale lacked much of being angelic.
When she encountered the stupidity of official red-tape or the
brutality and indifference of army surgeons, her words blistered.
She hurled invectives and she employed sarcastic nicknames, and she
denounced everything and everybody who opposed her. But when she
arrived in Scutari forty-two wounded men out of every hundred were
dying, and when she left them her hospitals showed a death-rate of
twenty-two out of every thousand. Clara Barton had a tongue less sharp
than Florence Nightingale’s, but she had a will no less inflexible.
Both women had soft voices, which they never raised. Men fled from the
soft tones and vitriolic words of Florence Nightingale. When Clara
Barton grew angry, she lowered her voice. Instead of a woman’s shrill
falsetto, men heard a deep and determined tone quietly affirming that
the thing was to be done in this way and in no other. Few men withstood
that tone.

Some readers of this book, I am sure, have been shocked to read the
opinion of Dr. Bellows of the Sanitary Commission concerning the
uselessness and worse of the ordinary woman nurse in war hospitals.
That opinion was shared by Dorothea Dix, by Clara Barton, and to an
even greater degree by Florence Nightingale.

Not very long after Florence Nightingale had reached Scutari with her
thirty-eight nurses, and about the time when she was having to ship
some of them back, her official friends in England thought to win her
eternal gratitude by sending to her forty-six additional nurses, under
the personal direction of her old friend, Miss Stanley. But she refused
to accept them, and sent in her resignation. She would not have these
“women scampering through the wards” and upsetting all her regulations.
“They are like troublesome children,” she said. Even the religious
ones were given to what she called “spiritual flirtations” with the
soldiers; and, as for those who had not the fear of God or the dread
of hell-fire, there were drunken orderlies and dissolute officers and
unmarried chaplains to be considered.

I have wondered what Dorothea Dix would have said if forty-six nurses
not of her selection had been suddenly dumped upon her; I think she
would have gone into hysterics and shipped them all back. Clara Barton,
I believe, would have set them to emptying slops and scrubbing floors
till she found the few out of whom she could make nurses. She would not
have written the kind of letters about them which Florence Nightingale
wrote. She would have scolded a little in her diary, and have written
the committee who had sent them a letter of thanks, requesting them
not to send any more until she asked for them, and meantime to send
her some bandages and some lemons. But she would have felt much as
Florence Nightingale felt. They were both self-willed women. They
needed all their will-power. It was well they had it.

Many interesting parallels suggest themselves between the work of Clara
Barton and that of Florence Nightingale.

They were contemporary in a remarkable degree. Florence Nightingale was
a few months the older and died a few months sooner than Clara Barton,
but both lived to be more than ninety years of age. Miss Nightingale
was born May 12, 1820, and died August 13, 1910; Clara Barton was born
December 25, 1821, and died April 12, 1912. They faced the question
of marriage in much the same fashion, and each one gave herself in
much the same spirit to her life-task. They were not unlike in their
religious faith and in its practical expression. The long, confidential
letters of Florence Nightingale, written painfully when she ought
to have been in bed, remind us of the detailed epistles which Clara
Barton found time to write, mostly late at night. Each had a love of
humor which stood her in good stead; Miss Barton’s had less sting in
it than that of Miss Nightingale, but otherwise it was not unlike,
and it was a great help to both of them. Each had a gentle voice, and
each knew how to use it effectively without raising it. Each protested
to the end of her life that her real work was not that of the popular
imagination, that of personally ministering to any considerable number
of sick or wounded soldiers, but a work of direction and organization;
and neither succeeded in making the public believe it. Not long before
her death, Clara Barton relieved her mind in her diary concerning the
sort of newspaper article which invented fairy-tales of this sort:
“Oh, these women reporters!” she said in her diary. “They never get
anything right. They are forever telling and inventing the same old
kind of gush!” Florence Nightingale also had a profound distrust of the
limitations of members of her own sex; but also she knew, as did Clara
Barton, the brutality, the stupidity, and the inefficiency of men.
Miss Nightingale often wondered if there were in all the army enough
officers of sympathy and conscience to have saved Sodom. Sometimes she
doubted if there was one.

All the women who went to the battle-front and were worth their
carfare were women of strong will. Mother Bickerdyke, in her rough
and great-hearted way, was a lady; but when she faced an incompetent
surgeon and drove him out of the hospital and he appealed to General
Sherman, the General confessed himself powerless: “She ranks me,” he
said. Dorothea Dix was a lady to the very depth of her sensitive soul,
a devoted, consecrated Christian lady; but she could be very properly
disagreeable on occasion, and she brooked no interference with her
authority. Florence Nightingale was a lady, born and bred; but vitriol
was mild compared to some of her outbursts. Clara Barton was a lady
to her very finger-tips; and she had had enough of experience in
Washington among officials and men of influence so that she knew how on
occasion to be much more diplomatic and gracious than most other women
with her responsibilities. Moreover, she shrank from giving pain, and
was careful of her words. But she had as strong a will as had Florence
Nightingale, and, while she was as a rule more amiable than that lady
in her more violent moods, she got things done. People sometimes found
her arbitrary, impatient, and obstinate; had she been less so, it had
gone hard with the interests which she cherished. She was capable of
being arbitrary, impatient, and obstinate, and the same is true of each
of the other women whom her name calls to mind. But among them she was
not the least gentle, considerate, and self-forgetful. She required
that things should move, and move in the direction of her decision; but
she was at heart, and on most occasions in her demeanor, quiet, gentle,
affectionate, and calm.

Clara Barton had many devoted and loyal friends. They were held by her
in warm and enduring affection; and some of them, for her sake and her
work’s sake, made generous sacrifices. She had other friends who came
to her in bursts of generous enthusiasm. These also were in good part
sincere, and if some of them found her habits so simple and her task so
heavy as to afford them smaller share than they had hoped in personal
association with her, they were none the less generally firm in their
friendship. It was not to be expected that every one could live
permanently on her high plane of single-mindedness. Some of her friends
were a trial to her, for it was not easy for her to understand why,
when they once knew the task she was working at, they did not manifest
stability of purpose and perseverance in well-doing. But these she
counted her friends. When one of these left her roof because the fare
was too plain, Clara Barton said, “She is not willing to wash herself
seven times in Jordan.”

There were others--and in the course of her long life there were a
number of them--who came to her with ardent protestations of affection
and of devotion to her cause, who in time wearied of the strain, or
resented her strong hand in management, or who came to believe that
they themselves could do better the work which she had undertaken. Some
of them betrayed her most sacred confidences, and returned her evil for
good.

Few women were so ill-fitted by nature to bear this kind of
disappointment as Clara Barton. She was morbidly sensitive, and given
to self-accusation. How unworthy she must be, she thought, if these
persons did not continue to love her. The wounds of their defection
went unhealed. Yet here was one of the finest triumphs of her nature.
She never cherished permanent resentment.

One time a friend of hers recalled to her a peculiarly cruel thing that
had been done to her some years previous, and Clara Barton did not seem
to understand what she was talking about.

“Don’t you remember the wrong that was done you?” she was asked.

Thoughtfully and calmly she answered, “No; I distinctly remember
forgetting that.”

Friends deserted Clara Barton, but she never deserted a friend. If
a friend of hers was evil-spoken against, that only increased her
loyalty. She would not believe evil unless compelled to do so, and, if
compelled, she interpreted the wrong, if possible, in terms of charity.
Only baseness and treachery and betrayal of trust won her scorn.

At one time, in connection with her relief work on the rivers, a man
who had acted as her local agent was arrested for burglary. She was at
a distance and wires were down. She refused to believe him guilty.
When later details made it impossible to doubt that he had done
essentially the deed with which he was charged, she still believed that
there must be some explanation. Later it developed that the offense was
technical, and grew out of a dispute as to the ownership of certain
premises which he had entered, and the other claimant, instead of
suing him for trespass, sought to do him the greater injury by having
him arrested for burglary. How the question of the ownership of the
property was ultimately settled, I do not know, but her confidence in
the man as one incapable of willful crime was justified.

Consul-General Hitz, of Switzerland, long her friend, became a banker
in Washington. Apparently he had little talent for the banking
business, and undertook to finance the Swedenborgian Church, of which
he was a member, out of the revenues of the bank. Of his guilt before
the law there appears to have been no question; as to his essential
honesty Clara Barton had no doubt. She did not condone the offense,
nor question that the amount taken must be made good; but she did not
believe that so good a man and so true a friend ought to remain in
prison. After high influence had been exercised unavailingly on his
behalf, she persisted, and he was released.

Her voice has already been mentioned. Its key was about the average
pitch of a woman’s treble voice. In conversation it was flexible, and
very pleasant. On the platform it was clear and penetrating. Her tones
were not musical, but were distinctly agreeable. Her inflections were
those of the gentlewoman of the old school. There was a soothing,
conciliatory, almost caressing quality in her voice. It had no
harsh notes. It was diametrically opposite to all that was harsh and
strident. It was gentle, winsome, and in every accent suggestive of
courtesy and good-breeding. When she lived abroad, no one accused her
of a high, harsh, nasal American voice. It was a New England voice, but
as soft as that of any Southern lady of the old days.

But when Clara Barton grew very much in earnest, her voice changed.
That change was one of the most remarkable things about her. It did not
rise. It did not grow harsh or self-asserting. It dropped a half octave
or, as it sometimes seemed, a full octave. It was a deep, full voice.
It was almost bass. Her eyes darkened as her voice went down, and
flashed lightning to her tones’ quiet thunder. She had a temper, which
she kept well under control, but when she spoke in a low tone, those
who heard her knew that its fires were red.

She was modest in her dress, but she had an eye for bright colors. In
her youth she was a painter, and she learned how to mix colors on her
palette. She never felt so sure of her good taste in the matter of
dress as she did of her ability to make pleasing contrasts on canvas.
She trusted much to the good judgment of her friend, Annie Childs. When
she followed her own judgment, she inclined to green, which she loved
to set off with red. Red was her color, and she said, the Barton rose
was the Red Rose, all the way from the Wars of the Roses down. She
loved red roses. She loved red apples. She liked to wear red ribbons
and trimmings. With a background of green, red was always safe. In her
youth and young womanhood she often determined to vary her costume,
and repeatedly went to the stores determined to buy something beside
green. Her nieces said, “If Aunt Clara says she is going to town to buy
a brown dress, we know that she will buy a brown dress; for Aunt Clara
invariably does exactly what she says she will do. So we know that she
will select and pay for a brown dress. But we also know that by the
time she gets it home the color will have changed; when she opens the
package, it is sure to have become green.”

In later years, dressmakers took her in hand, and widened the range
of her choice. But she seldom appeared in any gown that did not lend
itself to a little dash of red; and when she wore just what delighted
her own eyes, her dress was green, with a complementary dash of red.

Something must be said about her habit of economy, and it must be said
with some care lest it give a very wrong impression. Clara Barton was
economical to a very marked degree. If a list of her actual economies
were here given, it would produce on many minds the impression that she
was stingy. This would be wide of the truth. If a valid distinction
may be made between two words that are nearly synonymous, she was
parsimonious, but was not penurious.

She was reared in a community and in a family where want was unknown,
but where money was earned by hard work, and capital was accumulated
by thrift and economy. It was part of her birthright and of her
being. There was about her nothing that inclined her to waste or even
extravagance.

She entered into life early as a teacher, at first at a small salary.
She had opportunity to save, and she did save. Her necessary expenses
were small, and she began at the outset to save money. She continued
to save money. She had good business judgment, and, excepting for a few
times when she permitted her sympathies or her friendships to get the
better of that judgment, her investments, conservatively made, were
remunerative.

When she first went abroad in 1869, she knew that she had money enough
to support her as long as she lived. If she recovered her health, the
lecture platform was still open to her, and she could earn and save
above all expenses from four thousand dollars to six thousand dollars
a year. If she returned an invalid, she had the income on about thirty
thousand dollars, which was more than she needed. In no year of her
life, probably, did she spend upon herself as much as eighteen hundred
dollars. Even when she traveled abroad, her expenses were moderate,
and she never drew on her principal for her own support. But eighteen
hundred dollars or two thousand dollars a year, which was about what
her investments brought her, did not invite reckless extravagance, She
knew that she must exercise reasonable economy, and her tastes were
such that this was no hardship.

When, therefore, she sat up at night rather than take a sleeping-car,
it was not wholly that she was unwilling to pay for the price of the
berth. She had been accustomed to doing so until an attempt was made
to rob her, after which she was greatly disinclined to the use of the
sleeper. Her prime reason for sitting up was that she disliked sleepers
after that night. But she was not at all averse to saving two dollars.
She slept few hours in the night, and was accustomed to sleeping under
unfavorable conditions. She thought she rested quite as well sitting
in a corner of her seat as lying in a stuffy and dark berth.

Her lunch at home was often a few crackers and a red apple, and the
more nearly she regulated her diet when journeying in accordance with
her custom at home, the better life went with her. So her bag often
contained a little package of the kind of crackers which she liked,
and one or more big red apples. If she sat in her seat and ate these,
it was not primarily because she was unwilling to pay a dollar for
her lunch; she had the dollar, and she had no ambition to leave any
considerable sum of money behind her when she died. On the other hand,
she was not unmindful of the good she could do with the dollar in some
other way. And she did that good with it. She was parsimonious with
herself; she was generous toward others.

To enumerate her economies would misrepresent her. It would seem that
she was niggardly. The contrary was true. She abhorred waste. She could
not tolerate extravagance. But she could draw her last dollar, and
did draw her last dollar from investment, to put into her search for
missing soldiers, and she could do it and did do it without whining and
without fear. Even the possibility that she might die a pauper did not
terrify her or win from her in her diary any more than a half-mirthful
recognition. She economized in things she did not greatly care for that
she might do the things that were to her of supreme importance.

She did not hoard money. The amount which she had at the end of her
lecturing career, she did not greatly increase, nor, until she got deep
into the work of the Red Cross, did it materially diminish. In order
to support the Red Cross work in its earlier stages, she drew upon
her principal, and she did not to the end of her life restore it to
what it had been before. But she never complained of this, nor did it
in the least worry her. Year by year she had sufficient income, with
reasonable economy, to supply all her needs. Now and then she delivered
an address and received a hundred dollars. Occasionally she replied
to a request of newspaper or magazine for an article, and received a
check in return. For a year she received a salary from the State of
Massachusetts as matron of the Reformatory for Women at Sherborn. The
annuity paid to her by the Massachusetts General Hospital gave her a
little more margin. She was free from worry as to her own finances.
I have not found in her diary or her letters a single sentence in
which she expressed anxiety about her own financial future. There were
several times when she was not sure what she ought to do next, and
in her decisions she was not unmindful of financial necessities. But
she did not keep in constant thought her own need of saving money for
herself. She saved, because it was natural for her to save, and because
she had causes at heart which she wished to save for.

Careful in her expenditures upon herself, Clara Barton lavished her
love upon others. She cherished her friends, and there was little that
she was not willing to do for them. More than once she jeopardized
plans of her own for the sake of unselfish ministry to others, some of
whom had little claim upon her. She received under her own roof, fed at
her table, sheltered at her fireside, and assisted from her purse not
a few people who later proved ungrateful; indeed, those who wrought
her most pain were those whom she had befriended and of whom she later
learned that they sought not her, but hers.

Yet it would not be fair to give any impression that the number of
ingrates among her companions was large. Relatively, it was small.
Those who loved her loved with a fervent loyalty; and there are few
things more beautiful than the adoring and grateful affection which
those bestow upon her memory who knew her longest and best. A strong
individualist, she inspired in those who came to know her well that
perfect confidence and grateful devotion which are the crowning test of
leadership. There were those, who, for her sake and that of any cause
which she held dear, would have gone with her singing to the stake, and
she would never have permitted one of them to go there unless she went
first.

The author was her relative, her friend of many years. He loved her
and admired her; but he has felt his own praises weaken and pale and
disappear in the presence of those who, working in intimate association
with her through the years, proclaimed to him her virtues in terms that
but for their sincerity and the knowledge of those who spoke would have
seemed extravagant. The surest proof of her genuine goodness is the
unfaltering devotion of those who knew her best, and for that reason
loved her most.

Clara Barton was a woman of tact. She needed all the tact she had
and more. In every field in which she labored, she was flooded with
volunteer workers who wanted to help. Some of them were competent; more
were not. I recently talked with my long-time friend, Father Field,
sometime head of the Cowley Fathers, and learned that he was at the
Johnstown flood, and saw much of Clara Barton. They rode together in
a buggy over a road filled with trees and house-roofs and he feared
she would be thrown out, but she told him to drive on; she had driven
over worse roads, and with bullets besides. He said that her greatest
difficulty as he saw it there was the number of people of good impulse
but little discretion who rushed into Johnstown to help. Dr. Bellows
said a blunt word about the women who made their journey to the
battle-field, that most of them were in the way. This was unfortunately
true of many of the well-meaning people who rushed to the assistance of
Clara Barton in time of flood or fire. Assistance she must have, and
must take what was offered. But the handling of this untrained force
was a matter which called for the greatest tact as well as executive
ability.

Not only so, but, when the work in a particular field was over, there
were always those who had come as volunteer workers who insisted on
bestowing themselves upon Clara Barton to make Red Cross work their
life-work. Some of them were competent, and she was glad of them. But
in the course of her years of experience she accumulated a series of
misfit volunteer assistants, some of whom it was not easy afterward to
get rid of.

She had little love of music. She did not sing or play any musical
instrument. When traveling abroad, if forced to attend the opera, she
saved the time from utter waste by writing a home letter while singers
of world-wide repute performed and sang before her. Having a low and
soft voice, she disliked the high notes of women’s voices. Good,
melodious quartet music she heard with mild enjoyment, and if she can
be said to have liked any music it was that of male voices. A chorus
of men always pleased her. Some of the war songs always thrilled her,
though more for the associations than the music. There was one song,
popular during the later years of the Civil War, which she never heard
often enough. It was the song of an old slave, who, dying years before
the war, had believed that he would rise on the day when freedom came
to his race. The author also remembers it, as it was taught to him
almost before he could walk:

  Nicodemus the slave was of African birth,
    He was bought for a bagful of gold;
  He was reckoned as part of the salt of the earth,
    And he died years ago, very old.
  ’Twas the last word he said as we laid him away
    In the stump of an old hollow tree,--
  “Wake me up,” was his charge, “at the first break of day,
    Wake me up for the great jubilee.”

  _Chorus_:

  Then run and tell Elijah to hurry up, Pomp,
  To meet us at the gum-tree down in the swamp,
            To wake Nicodemus to-day.

It was sung at the minstrel shows after the Emancipation Proclamation;
but it was not as a minstrel show song that Clara Barton enjoyed it.
There was a solemn dignity about the old slave’s faith that inspired
her; and the authoritative tones of the words “Wake Nicodemus” thrilled
her through and through.

Her lack of love of music reached its climax in her abhorrence of
piano-drumming. For piano music she had some little love, but not
enough to compensate for the annoyance for having a piano where it
could be pounded by any visitor, skilled or unskilled. For many years
she refused to have a piano in her house. At last she permitted one
to be procured, and she gave it house-room, and sometimes heard it
played with satisfaction. But when she was hard at work and wanted to
concentrate her thought, she found no joy in the thoughtless hammering
which an open piano seemed to invite. There was a time for all things,
even for piano-playing, and in its proper time and place she could
permit it and enjoy a part of it; but she did not want the menace of
it from early morn till dewy eve and several hours thereafter. Her
home was a very open place of entertainment, and she could not well
inquire, before admitting a person who needed shelter, what were his
or her habits and ability with respect to the torture of piano keys.
So she would have preferred a home with only such music as was brought
in where,and when it was wanted. But she accepted the piano as in some
sort inevitable, and it did not annoy her as much as she had expected.

If Clara Barton did not care for music, she did dearly love poetry.
From her earliest childhood she was reading it, committing it to
memory, copying it, and writing original lines of her own. There lies
before me, as I write, her first copy-book. The strokes and curves
she learned to imitate are there, then the letters, lower case and
capitals, then the first words, “thoughtful,” “Nation,” and “National,”
and the sentence, chosen perhaps for its varied arrangement of letters
with the simplest stem and curve, and partly because it was not well
for a New England child at school to begin life with any illusion about
its essential character, “Man was made to mourn.”

Who was the teacher who set her these copies we do not know, but
she copied them well. The first poetic lines that she was given to
transcribe were these, melodious but not precisely soothing to the
juvenile mind:

  Then rose the cry of females, shrill,
  As goss-hawks whistle on the hill,
  Denouncing misery and ill,
  Mingled with childhood’s bubbling thrill
        Of curses stammered slow;
  Answering, with imprecation dread,
  “Sunk be his home in embers red,
  And cursed be the meanest shed
  That e’er shall hide his houseless head
        We doom to want and woe!”

This was rather strong sentiment for a timid and sympathetic little
girl, and she would probably have shuddered at it in prose; but in
verse she probably committed it to memory as she was in process of
copying it.

This completed the childhood work, and the book is filled, in her more
mature hand, with complete poems, “The Pilgrim Fathers,--where are
they?” “The Burial of Arnold,” “The Hour of Prayer,” “Warren at Bunker
Hill,” “The Indian’s Lament,” “The Fall of Tecumseh,” and other poems,
heroic, patriotic, devotional, and ending with “Farewell to the Bride.”

Later she procured a bound volume, and in it she copied her favorite
poems, and wrote others of her own, in her most careful and painstaking
hand. Her “copper-plate” penmanship was never more exquisite than in
this volume, in which her own poems and the poems she loved are written
in order as she found or composed them.

No quality in Clara Barton was more marked than the breadth of her
sympathies. She shuddered at the thought of needless pain. I have a
crude little picture, a page out of a child’s book, which she found
in her childhood and preserved to the end of her life. It is entitled
“What came of firing a gun.” A dead bird lies on the ground, and is
approached on the one side by a boy with a gun in his hand and on the
other by a horrified girl. It is not a great work of art, but it tells
its story and conveys its lesson.

She never gave needless pain. She regarded all life as akin to the life
of God, and sacred with the imprint of God’s own image. She looked upon
all life that can suffer or enjoy, the life of bird and beast and fish,
as something on which it is a sin to inflict needless pain.

From the time she saw, in her little girlhood, the killing of an ox,
and felt that the blow that struck and crushed its skull had struck her
own head, she never saw pain without feeling it. She could have said
with Whitman of the suffering she saw--

  My wounds on me grow livid as I lean
      Upon my staff and look.

She did not merely sympathize with suffering; she suffered. She not
only was glad of other people’s joy; it was her joy. She rejoiced with
those that did rejoice and wept with those that wept. Not often do her
diaries record her weeping; and the tears she records as having shed
are oftener for others’ sorrows than for her own. Her sympathy was
genuine, and of the sort which can truly be called vicarious. She took
it upon herself.

Her sympathies were so strong that she would have been useless in
the presence of danger and pain but for her remarkable self-control.
I asked her once how she acquired this, and she said it was simply
by forgetting herself. She saw something that needed to be done, and
went about the doing of it so promptly, so completely absorbed by the
necessity of it, that she forgot to be horrified by the sight of blood,
forgot to faint as timid females were supposed to do. Days and weeks
and months and years of it she would endure and never once give way.
Then would come a revulsion and a horror and a weakness and a collapse.
Again and again she held herself in hand through nervous strain that
would have crushed most women or men, and when it was all over went
nervously to pieces.

It appears a pity that, being capable of maintaining her self-control
till the end of the crisis, she could not still have maintained it when
the need was over. But it was a part of her delicately strung organism
to bear any manner of strain while the need lasted, and then to snap.
The remarkable fact is, not that she ultimately gave way, but that she
endured so long and so much.

Clara Barton was a woman to her finger-tips. Nothing that she saw or
suffered ever coarsened her or made her oblivious to the finer things
of life. Nothing that came of her association with men--and rough
men at that--made her anything less than a woman and a lady. She was
distinctly feminine. She had her own way of ignoring any incident
occurring in her presence at which she might have been expected to
be shocked, but of stickling at any trivial act which implied that
she was indifferent to proprieties. Teamsters, with their wagons deep
to the hubs in mud, might swear at their mules and she would never
hear it; but at night by the camp-fire she could rebuke with a quiet
and effective word or look the slightest approach to impropriety
of word or deed. She was no prude when she had a duty to perform,
and conventionalities meant little to her in the presence of human
need. But on her return to home life, she was gentle, ladylike, and a
stickler for proprieties.

She had no love for the mannish woman. She was much in the society
of men. In many respects she preferred the society of men to that of
women. She entered into their joys and experiences appreciatively. But
in it all she was distinctly feminine. She was a woman always, a lady
always. People who expected to meet in her a big, aggressive female,
with a long stride and a heavy voice and a domineering attitude, were
amazed. She was a little, undemonstrative gentlewoman of the old school.

One of Clara Barton’s most outstanding qualities was her almost
complete disregard of precedent. The fact that a thing had always been
done in a given way was evidence to her that it could be done again in
that fashion, but was of almost no value to her as proving that that
was the best way to do it. She always had faith in the possibility of
something better. It irritated her to be told how things always had
been done. She knew that a very large proportion of things that have
been done since the creation have been blunderingly done, and she was
always ready to listen to suggestions of better ways. Having once
decided upon a course that defied the tyranny of precedent, she held
true to her declaration of independence, and saw her experiment through.

In this she was not reckless or iconoclastic. She simply forbade
herself the cheap luxury of a closed mind. If no better way presented
itself, she was content with the old way of doing. But she was
eager for any new thing that might improve upon the past. Hers was
preëminently a forward-looking mind and a soul with face ever toward
the sunrise.




CHAPTER XIX

CLARA BARTON’S LAST YEARS


Clara Barton lived for eight years after her retirement from the Red
Cross. After her first disappointment and the giving-up of her dream
of exile in Mexico, her heart turned to a form of work which already
had been much upon her mind. In establishing the American Red Cross,
she had determined from the outset that it should be of use in peace
as well as in war. The conviction grew upon her that it should be
broadened still further so that its activities should not be confined
to periods of calamity, but that there should be established under its
direction various forms of community service. Particularly did she
desire that in every community there should be organizations for home
nursing and first aid to the injured.

Before her retirement from the Red Cross, she had proposed to her
associates the addition of a First Aid Department as a part of its
activities. This did not seem to her board of control an advisable
field for the Red Cross to enter at that time. After her resignation
from the presidency of the American Red Cross, she organized the
“National First Aid Association of America,” which was incorporated
under the laws of the District of Columbia and had its general office
in Boston. The plan included a large sustaining membership with a
nominal fee of a dollar a year, and an active membership composed of
those in every community who attended a course of lectures and passed a
physical examination.

The plan of this new organization, as originally planned by her for the
Red Cross, was fully set forth in a brief manuscript which she prepared:

 During the entire period of the present differences among sections of
 the members of the American National Red Cross, I have never once felt
 that it was the desire of the American people that I should personally
 enter within the circle of disturbance, and I have consequently
 remained a silent and sorrowful spectator of a controversy that
 appeared to me to be leading where no true, loyal friend of the Red
 Cross would care to follow.

 Every effort I have ever made on behalf of the people of the United
 States, during the long years of my work, has been met with friendly
 approval or thoughtful response. These efforts have always been made
 on behalf of suffering humanity, in times of dire distress and peril,
 and I have administered with a free but careful hand the benefactions
 of whatever nature that have been entrusted to me; and as freely I
 have given of all I possessed of strength, health, and private means.

 Never once have I made a suggestion on behalf of myself or my
 difficulties, and I have therefore had the confidence to feel that
 nothing was expected of me but a straightforward advance along the
 natural path of my life-work. So certain have I been of this, and so
 confident in the firm loyalty, safe counsel, and moral support of
 the eminent help surrounding me, that I have felt free to devote my
 energies during the past months to perfecting a plan for so broadening
 and strengthening the organization of the Red Cross that it may enter
 on a new field of useful activity--on a work that will appeal directly
 to the people everywhere, and prepare them, in these times of peaceful
 well-being, to meet intelligently and successfully any emergency or
 disaster that may occur, either nationally or individually. It is
 my desire that this new work shall be the means of creating ample
 funds to meet any great national calamity, and that the Red Cross may
 hereafter enter the field fully equipped at the instant the call may
 come.

 In times past urgent calls have come to us and precious time has
 been lost through lack of funds and suitable equipment. It is most
 desirable that this condition should be remedied, and it is to this
 end that I am making an appeal to the American people--_not for
 their money nor their substance_, but that they _coöperate_ with me
 earnestly in this new work: this effort to benefit themselves, that
 I am endeavoring to inaugurate. It will be borne in mind that, in
 the twenty years of its existence, the American National Red Cross
 has never appealed, never asked for, or sought the control of, a
 dollar even for relief; but has, as it seeks to do in this, left the
 people free in the exercise of their own choice and intelligence. The
 only apparent suspension of this method took place during the active
 service of the Spanish-American War, when the great committees, formed
 at the instance of President McKinley, raised money for relief, in
 the name of the Red Cross, and applied it; the society itself holding
 its normal position under the attorneyship of the noble Cuban Relief
 Committee, which did honor to itself and the Nation.

 Can it be too much to expect that this one appeal will meet a ready
 response at the hands of the people?

 We are actively organizing a new branch of the Red Cross, to be known
 as “The First Aid Department” of the American National Red Cross,
 which department will be largely educational and will concern itself
 in instructing the people everywhere throughout the United States
 in the best modern methods of first aid treatment, in all cases of
 accident and emergency.

 There will be two distinct branches of this work. For the first an
 emergency case, similar to that in use in England, Germany, and other
 Red Cross Treaty Nations, and this has been adapted to Red Cross needs
 and methods under the direct supervision of the Medical Board of the
 Red Cross Hospital. It contains material and surgical dressings of
 the best class known to modern surgery. A most valuable part of the
 permanent equipment of this emergency case is a series of emergency
 charts, arranged for instantaneous reference, giving simple brief
 instructions for dealing with every conceivable case of accident,
 pending the arrival of the doctor. This chart is the combined work of
 a committee of eminent physicians and surgeons; and, apart from the
 admirable manner of its arrangement, may be regarded as the highest
 standard of authority upon first aid methods of treatment known to the
 world.

 The other branch of the department will undertake the formation of
 first aid emergency classes in every city in the country. Ambulance
 corps will be formed among the employees of mills and factories,
 industrial corporations, railroad employees, the police, and employees
 of public departments. These employees will be drilled and instructed
 in first aid methods, and, apart from the value of the knowledge they
 will obtain for local use and service, they will form an efficient
 force to draw from as helpers in great national calamities.

 These methods are in no way experimental. In many European countries,
 as Germany, Russia, and even Asiatic Japan, they form one of the
 strongest features of the Red Cross. They are also in perfect accord
 with its first principles, viz., the voluntary help of the people for
 the Government, if in need, and the organized help of the people for
 each other in misfortune.

 This practical work in the united hands of the whole American people
 should raise the organization far above the need of charitable gifts
 for its support. The Red Cross belongs to the people; they should be
 their own almoners and administer their own charities.

 The intelligent thought of the philanthropists of the world is behind
 these methods; tried, well assured, and successful. Do we need to know
 more?

 I make a strong appeal for the formation of local committees
 everywhere; to coöperate with the headquarters staff of the First
 Aid Department in the formation of classes. I appeal earnestly
 to physicians in every town in the United States to render their
 aid. Next to the stricken victim and immediate friends will the
 kind-hearted doctor appreciate this timely and intelligent help.

 I appeal to every employer of labor throughout the country on behalf
 of this movement. I need not remind him that it is a duty, for his
 own kind heart will call him with a tender care to the welfare and
 safety of those whom circumstances and conditions have, for the time
 being, made his own. Their well-being is his, and protection from the
 inevitable dangers surrounding them will be his first care. My own
 convictions assure me that this appeal will be heard and responded to.
 I have known my country people--their good judgment, good hearts, and
 generous natures--too well to permit a moment’s doubt.

 We have established headquarters for this department at 31 East 17th
 Street (Union Square), New York City, where all inquiries relative to
 the Red Cross Emergency Corps and the formation of classes should be
 addressed to the General Superintendent.

 The plan of organization includes the formation of a finance
 committee, consisting of men of national reputation, who shall have
 entire charge of the funds of the Red Cross. This course is made
 necessary by the increased scope of the work contemplated, and also
 because it is desirable, when one returns, worn and weary, from
 a field of work, that no question shall arise as to the proper
 distribution of funds.

 I offer no excuse for making this appeal, beyond the vast importance
 of the work and the strong, ever-present desire to see that work which
 has been a part of my life grow into a great beneficent institution
 that shall be worthy of this country and its people; to see the Red
 Cross a badge of honor and distinction, and to know that the time will
 come when the active members of the American Red Cross will form the
 Légion d’Honneur of the United States.

This peace-time and year-round activity of the Red Cross was a part of
Clara Barton’s programme from the first. It was a distinctive feature
of the American Red Cross, as she planned it, that its operation
should not be limited to the battle-field. Her work in time of great
calamity was taken over by European organizations, which in time went
beyond the development of the Red Cross in America, and exhibited the
full practicability of what she from the outset had believed. When
she retired from the Red Cross, she took up this work as a separate
activity; and she lived long enough to see the Red Cross, no longer
under her direction, taking up a plan which she had long advocated.
She made a little smiling comment upon it in her diary, and wished it
success.

It would have gratified Clara Barton exceedingly could she have known
that during and after the Great World War there would be organized
throughout America, under the direction of the American Red Cross,
classes for the training of people, especially women, in these and
kindred lines of service. It is one more illustration of the wisdom and
prevision of Clara Barton.

The years following her retirement found her active in the work of
the Woman’s Relief Corps, of which she had long served as national
chaplain. She was also a guest of honor at two or more National Grand
Army encampments, and was everywhere hailed as the friend of the
soldier. During these years she seemed to grow younger rather than
older. When she was past eighty-four, a newspaper reporter described
her as “a middle-aged woman.”

She made two visits to Chicago in her last years, and the visits did
not greatly weary her. The last of these visits was in May, 1910. She
was guest at a continuous round of engagements. At the May Festival of
the Social Economics Club, she shook hands with nearly two thousand
people. She attended a breakfast with eleven hundred guests and shook
hands with nearly all of them.

The author of this volume holds this visit in happy memory. It occupied
three weeks, one of which Miss Barton spent in the home of her cousin,
the author. He accompanied her to a reception given in her honor at
Abraham Lincoln Center, and saw her safely on her way to a number of
other engagements which she had promised to attend. She met innumerable
friends, many of whom called at the house to see her, and she answered
scores of letters. She rose very early in the morning and sat at her
desk until late at night, and was always calm, strong, and resolute.

She had promised to speak to the young people at their meeting on
Sunday evening; but when this arrangement became known there was a
demand for a wider hearing. She cheerfully consented to speak in the
large auditorium of the church on Sunday evening. Her voice was clear,
and filled the great room; every person present heard distinctly,
although she was almost ninety years of age. Nor did she forget to
tease her cousin a little over the fact that she spoke to more people
in the evening than he in the morning; though his morning congregation
was not a small one.

Between her engagements were frequent opportunities during that week
for visits with her. She talked calmly about all her experiences. She
reviewed her work on the battle-field during the Civil War, and spoke
with deep interest of her experiences in Constantinople where she had
been near to the scene of the earlier work of Florence Nightingale.
She talked of her religious convictions, and of the faith with which
she was facing the future. She spoke in detail about the American
Red Cross. It is only just to her memory to record that in all her
conversation there was no word of bitterness or resentment, or any
approach to jealousy as she saw that organization moving forward under
the direction of others.

She was happy, full of fun, gracious, considerate, and interested in
all that was going on in the world. When she sat in her chair at the
end of a strenuous day’s work, she rarely leaned back to touch the back
of the seat; she had a back of her own, she said.

If the author could give to his readers a truthful impression of that
visit, it would be the best possible insight into the character of
Clara Barton. She combined in the rarest possible degree self-reliance
and modesty. She knew that the work which she had done was a great
work, but it confused her when any one told her so. She responded to
every suggestion of appreciation, but she grew shy whenever she heard
herself praised. Throughout the whole visit she manifested the finest
quality of the cultured gentlewoman.

One thing she deeply regretted, and that was that her retirement had
not yet brought her sufficient leisure to sort her papers and prepare
for the writing of her biography. That such a book would be written she
fully realized, and she cared much who wrote it. She was perfectly well
in body and clear in mind, and what she hoped to do was to go through a
vast accumulation of manuscripts and make the task of writing an easier
one.

The author urged her to write the book herself, and she hoped to
continue the work which she had begun and to write the story of her
life in short sections. One such section she wrote and it is quoted in
the first volume of this present work. But she found too much to do in
helping the lives of others to pay very much attention to the record of
her own life.

So the years went by and her life-work was completed and her biography
remained unwritten. She was always thinking of another thing that
needed to be accomplished, and saying concerning it, “Until that work
is done, I cannot go to heaven.”




CHAPTER XX

CLARA BARTON’S DEATH AND RESURRECTION


Clara Barton died young. Even to those who were near her, she never
seemed to grow old. At ninety there was no mark of physical infirmity
upon her, nor was there any slightest slackening in the interest of the
object for which so long she had cared. On her ninetieth birthday she
wrote to the Reverend Percy H. Hepler:

 Notwithstanding the much and more that has been said of “age” and all
 the stress laid upon it, I could never see and have never been able
 to understand how it came to be any business of ours. We have surely
 no control over its beginning, and, unless criminally, none over its
 ending. We can neither hasten nor arrest it, and how it is a matter
 of individual commendation I have never been able to see. I have been
 able to see painfully that the persistent marking of dates and adding
 one milestone to every year has a tendency to increase the burden
 of “age” and encourages a feeling of helplessness and release from
 activities which might be a pleasure to the possessor. I have given
 the exact age as recorded, lest I be suspected of trying to conceal
 it, but I have never, since a child, kept a “birthday” or thought of
 it only as a reminder by others.

 Somehow it has come to me to consider strength and activity, aided so
 far as possible by right habits of life, as forming a more correct
 line of limitations than the mere passing of years.

Something similar to this she said to the author. She had no pride
in her great age; she did not like to be thought of as an old lady.
Years were to her merely opportunities of service, not measures of
life. Notwithstanding this attitude, which prolonged her life and
kept her young in spirit, Clara Barton was nearing the end of life’s
journey. She had a heavy cold in the winter of 1908 and 1909, but fully
recovered, and never seemed better in health than in the summer of 1910
when she made her journey to Chicago referred to in the last chapter.
Unfortunately, she reached New England in a cold summer storm, which
seemed almost like sleet, and her exposure seriously weakened her.

She returned to Glen Echo in August, but did not fully recover her
strength. That winter she had double pneumonia, and her physician told
her she had but one chance of life. “I will take that chance,” she said
calmly. She took that chance and recovered.

But she did not grow strong again. The news of the death of her niece,
Mrs. Riccius, was a great shock to her. Her heart almost ceased to
beat. Always her concern for those whom she loved affected her more
than anything that could happen to her.

In the summer of 1911 she made her last visit to Oxford. She made the
journey with no ill effects, but the summer did not bring her permanent
improvement. Long years of constant work and the serious illness of
the winter had caused a slight weakness in the muscular action of the
heart. Otherwise, her physicians could find no organic ailment.

When she was at work in Galveston in 1900, she was seriously ill. Her
physician whispered to her nephew, Stephen, that she could live only a
few hours. She overheard the word, and calling Stephen to her whispered
to him, “I shall not die; don’t let them frighten you.” In that spirit
she had met the numerous predictions of her death in the various
illnesses of the years.

But it was not so after the summer of 1911. She went back to Glen Echo
without her usual invigoration from her weeks in New England.

Still she did not give up. She had periods of old-time vigor. Here is
an entry in her diary for Friday and Saturday, February 11 and 12, 1910:

 At night I fold the wash of Monday for ironing to-morrow. Up at six:
 commenced ironing and continued till all was done, at one o’clock.
 At night took the clothes from the frames and put them in place, and
 felt that for once one thing was done as it should be. ’Twas finished
 before leaving.

She commented on the bad behavior of the Suffragettes, whom she
believed to be injuring their cause by unwomanly conduct.

A week later:

 We moved the large desk to my chambers from the dining-room below. A
 spacious desk it makes. One should be able to write a History of the
 World with such accommodations.

She was concerned for her old and faithful horse, Baba; and, when one
night he was out in pasture and it turned somewhat cold, she could not
sleep, but got up at four o’clock in the morning, fed Baba a full feed
of corn, and some fruit from the table, and went back to bed.

Her diaries of 1907 had been neglected. She tried to bring them up to
date from her pencil notes:

 It seems to have been a hard year for me. It makes me tired to read it.

That spring she trimmed the rosebushes and set out flowers. A fire
broke out in her room; the floor grew hot from the burning-out of the
soot in a sheet-iron drum; and she got water and wet the floor till
the chimney and pipe had burned out.

She mourned over the death of Mark Twain:

 We have lost something very precious in his rich vein of humor. There
 are losses that are never made good. We have not another Whittier, or
 another Mark Twain.

The diary for 1911 begins with the multitude of Christmas greetings
received and sent. The process took her several days and left her
very weary. This led her to reflect that she was kept so busy with
inconsequential writing that she had no time to do the writing she so
much wanted to do, her Life and the story of her work.

She had an invitation from the “Review of Reviews” to write an article
on “Hospitals and Hospital Nurses of the Civil War.” She declined, on
the ground that she knew nothing about the subject! She had not been a
nurse, and did not pretend to write as if she had been.

This was in January, 1911, and in February she had pneumonia, but
recovered.

That summer she had two or more visits from a man who expressed himself
with great emphasis on the subject of the immodesty of woman’s dress;
she agreed with him, but felt it was hardly fair to talk to her as if
she were to blame or needed to be convinced. “But really, he is not
without provocation. Huge hats, dangerous hatpins, hobble and harem
skirts, and the conduct of the Suffragettes are hard to defend.”

Most of her visitors just ran in from Washington, and ran away,
hurrying back to the city. One day an old friend came and spent the
afternoon and the night:

 This day has been extremely social. It is really refreshing to see a
 man who has a little time, and not always in a rush with a watch in
 his hand to catch the next train. I fail to believe that these nervous
 persons accomplish the most, or are actually the best business men.
 Hurry is a habit with them. They make every one uncomfortable with
 their own selfish plans, and all are relieved to get them off and see
 them go.

In April she began to feel that she could take up and finish her
History of the Red Cross.

In that month, Dr. Hubbell was grafting trees. She had always coveted
the learning of that art; so she took lessons in tree-grafting. Also,
she began to learn the use of the typewriter, at the age of eighty-nine.

She was interested in the trial of the Los Angeles dynamiters; in
the activity of Mr. Bryan, whom she wished the Democrats might have
sense enough to nominate; and, if a Democrat had to be elected, she, a
Republican, wished it might be he.

She read a “Life” of the Brontë sisters. She read in good English
translations “The Apology” of Socrates, the address of Xenophon to
his army, some of the orations of Demosthenes, and other good old
literature. She read the daily papers, and commented on all important
current happenings.

She provided a final home for Baba, eighty miles away in Virginia, bade
him a fond farewell, and sent money regularly to keep him well fed.

In May she wrote her will; the same will that was probated a few months
later.

She commented on the great Suffrage parade in London, with satisfaction
that the cause of Woman Suffrage was gaining, but with rather sad
reflection that, fallible as men were, she had found women even more
so; and she thought suffrage would be a blessing, but not an unmixed
blessing.

She salted down eggs in early summer, and in the late fall they were
candled and found good. She oversaw the management of her household,
and part of the time she did her own cooking, in this, her last summer.

These citations are given, not because they are important in
themselves, but because they give little glimpses of her life in her
last few months. Certainly she did not permit herself to rust out in
mind or body. A physical examination after her recovery from pneumonia
in 1911 found her with every bodily organ sound, but with a pulse
somewhat easily disturbed.

On Christmas, 1911, her ninetieth birthday, she sent to the world
through the press this message:

 Please deliver for me a message of peace and good-will to all the
 world for Christmas. I am feeling much better to-day, and have every
 hope of spending a pleasant and joyful Christmas, my ninetieth
 birthday.

Her hope was fulfilled and she celebrated her ninetieth Christmas with
quiet but cheerful festivities.

As the rigor of winter came on, she was taken again with double
pneumonia. In the weeks that followed, hope alternated with fear,
until, on April 12, 1912, at nine o’clock in the morning, she cried
out, “Let me go; let me go,” and the earthly life of Clara Barton came
to its close.

A few days before she died, she talked with her nephew, Stephen,
concerning her funeral, and chose for herself the principal speakers.
She desired that her long-time and trusted friend, Mrs. John A. Logan,
should say the principal words in a preliminary service to be held in
Glen Echo, and that at the main funeral service to be held in Oxford,
the chief speakers should be her friend the Reverend Percy Epler, and
her cousin, the Reverend William E. Barton. She mentioned others as
those whom she would be glad to have share in the services, and her
wishes were carried out.

On Sunday afternoon a brief service was held at Glen Echo. The
Reverend John Van Schaick, Jr., pastor of the “Church of our Father,”
Universalist, of Washington, read the Scripture and offered prayer.

The Reverend W. W. Curry, a veteran of the Civil War, paid her a brief
and heartfelt tribute, which was followed by three addresses, by
Chaplain Coudon, of the House of Representatives, Mrs. John A. Logan,
and the Honorable Peter V. De Graw.

The body reached Oxford in the early morning of April 16th, accompanied
by Mr. and Mrs. Stephen E. Barton; Francis Atwater, of Meriden,
Connecticut; Dr. Eugene Underhill, President of the Nurses’ College
of Philadelphia; and Dr. Julian B. Hubbell. It had long since become
apparent that no church in Oxford would contain the congregation. The
service was held in Memorial Hall, which was filled to overflowing,
and it was estimated that as many as five hundred people were unable
to secure admission. Delegations were present from many cities, and
representatives of various patriotic organizations were in attendance.
Floral tributes had been received from many parts of the Nation, and a
magnificent wreath was sent by the Grand Duchess of Baden. The casket
was almost hidden with flowers. Above it was a great red cross made of
carnations, and upon the casket was a large bouquet of red roses, the
flowers which all her life she most had loved and which had belonged to
her family since the days of the Wars of the Roses.

Appropriate music was rendered by the Schumann Quartet of Boston,
who sang sympathetically Tennyson’s “Crossing the Bar.” The opening
words of Scripture, “I am the Resurrection and the Life,” and of the
comforting sentences, “Let not your heart be troubled,” were recited by
the Reverend William E. Barton.

The Reverend John P. Marvin read the Bible lesson. Mrs. Allen L. Joslyn
read a beautiful tribute from the Town of Oxford, and Mr. J. Brainard
Hall, of Worcester, a veteran of the Civil War, represented the Woman’s
Relief Corps in a tribute which included the placing of a silk flag
upon her breast as she lay in the casket.

The two formal addresses were then delivered by the ministers whom she
had chosen, the Reverend Percy E. Epler, pastor of the Adams Square
Congregational Church of Worcester, and the Reverend William E. Barton,
of Oak Park, Illinois.

For an hour after the service, the people filed through the hall and
past the casket for a last look at her face.

The body was then borne to the hearse, escorted by a guard of the Grand
Army of the Republic, its chaplain, H. A. Philbrook, and the color
sergeant leading the procession.

The North Oxford Cemetery has a beautiful and sightly elevation,
containing the largest lot in the enclosure where for generations the
Bartons have been buried. There her body was laid to rest, the hands of
old soldiers lowering it to its last resting-place.

It was a glorious day in the spring. The services had begun at one
o’clock, and, as the procession entered the cemetery, the sun was
near its setting. The cemetery was thronged with people, the crowd
containing many who had been unable to secure admission to the hall.
The music in the hall had been rendered by a male quartet. Clara Barton
had never cared greatly for music, but the music that she liked best
was that rendered by male voices or sung heartily by a congregation. In
the cemetery one hymn was sung, “Nearer, my God, to Thee,” the whole
great congregation joining in the singing.

[Illustration:

  CLARA BARTON

  “ANGEL OF THE BATTLEFIELD”
  CIVIL WAR 1861-1865
  FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR 1870-1871
  SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR 1898
  ORGANIZER AND PRESIDENT OF THE
  AMERICAN NATIONAL RED CROSS
  1881--1904

  DEC. 25, 1821--April 12, 1912

IN THE CEMETERY AT OXFORD]

A prayer was offered by a blind soldier, Chaplain Simmons, of Worcester.

The closing scene can hardly be described. Dr. Barton took his place at
the head of the grave, holding in his hand a large bunch of red roses,
and the place at the foot of the grave was taken by the Reverend Doctor
Tyler, “Father Tyler,” a venerable and saintly man, who had buried the
fathers and mothers of the Barton family in Oxford. He stood with his
long white beard and silver hair irradiated by the sunset; and, in a
voice tender, and reverent and comforting, spoke the following words:

 In the few words with which I am to close this service, I shall
 indulge in no repetition of what has been said, and so well said,
 by the principal speakers on this occasion, eulogistic of the life
 and the life-work of the most celebrated woman of the world, whose
 mortal remains we have here deposited in the resting-place of her
 choice, among the beloved of her family. My thought will lead you in
 another direction, which has hardly been alluded to, if at all, in the
 eloquent addresses to which we have listened.

 As we look into the grave and bid farewell to the mortal remains of
 Clara Barton, we instinctively are led to ask ourselves, “Where is
 Clara Barton who for more than ninety years made them the agencies
 of her great work in the world?” The life, the spirit, the soul--has
 that been destroyed by death? Does utter annihilation follow the
 development and growth of such a life?

 As a Christian minister I feel I give a voice to the scriptural
 revelation of life and immortality when I say emphatically, “No!” She
 still lives! She has entered the pearly gates of the Holy City and is
 now walking the golden streets of the New Jerusalem! She has been born
 again into the newer life, as Christ taught the inquiring Pharisee,
 and our aged friend is now among the youngest of the Immortals!

 I feel that while the Nation mourns because of her going, all heaven
 is rejoicing because of her coming! This great gathering of friends
 who sorrowfully bid her good-bye is but typical of the greater
 multitude of friends who have gone before her, and who, with smiling
 faces and extended hands, have given her a heavenly welcome. In a
 little while, after the pain of our grief has softened, we shall be
 glad, and bless God that He has taken her to Himself.

 Now we know nothing, or but little, of the vocations and employments
 of the eternal life; except concerning the angels as “ministering
 spirits” they are nowhere revealed; but reasoning from analogy I am
 convinced that as doing is necessary to our happiness here, so a busy
 activity must be essential to the happiness of Heaven. In this regard
 we may be assured that Clara Barton will not be found wanting.

 And so by faith beholding her as a happy spirit in the glorious life
 to which she has been promoted, we may all join in giving to these
 relics of her earthly life, as they peacefully rest for always in
 their last home, a heartfelt, loving

  Good-Bye!


At the close of this brief and touching address, Dr. Barton spoke the
words of committal; and, as he uttered, “Dust to dust, ashes to ashes,”
dropped upon the lowered casket the large red roses, and pronounced the
benediction.

Just then a mother stepped up and whispered, “My little girl was born
in Clara Barton’s birthplace; in the very room where she was born. Will
you baptize her, and will you do it now?”

“Bring her to me,” said the minister, “and I will christen her ‘Clara
Barton.’”

So the name was bestowed in that hour upon another little girl, whose
parents sought that the spirit that had lived in Clara Barton might
live again in the life of their own daughter.

Two years from the following summer, the world witnessed a desolating
war, and the months that followed wrought their inevitable destiny
by plunging America into the seething conflict. Long before America
formally entered the fight, the American Red Cross was active in
measures of relief for the sorrowing nations of Europe. When, at
length, the United States itself entered the war, the Red Cross blazed
forth in every community between the oceans. Churches and town halls
and private homes became dépôts where supplies were collected, bandages
rolled, and workers trained. Hospitals, in our own country and along
the battle-front, were erected and equipped. To them went thousands of
American young women, each one of them wearing, on her arm or cap, the
symbol which Clara Barton brought back to her own land after the close
of the Franco-Prussian War. In their heroism and their deeds of mercy,
Clara Barton lived again.


THE END




INDEX


  Acquia Creek, I: 168, 209, 273.

  Alcott, Louisa M., I: 47.

  Amidon, George H., I: 314.

  Andrew, Gov. John A., I: 156, 159, 160.

  Andrews, B. P., II: 162.

  Anthony, Susan B., I: 1.

  Appia, Dr. Louis, II: 5, 11, 120;
    letters from Clara Barton, 121, 130 _seq._;
    letter to Clara Barton, 124.

  Armenia, II: 244.

  Arogo, transport, I: 240.

  Arthur, Chester A., expresses interest in Red Cross, II: 162;
    recommends Red Cross treaty, 164, 188, 192.

  Atlantic Monthly, quoted, I: 143.

  Atwater, Dorence, I: 2, 317 _seq._;
    arrested and imprisoned, 322 _seq._;
    his list printed in New York Tribune, 327;
    his subsequent life, 327.


  Bardwell, Rev. Horatio, I: 57.

  Barker, Miss Louise, I: 60.

  Barton, Ada, I: 133.

  Barton, Anna, wife of Edmund, I: 13.

  Barton, Augustine de, I: 10.

  Barton, Clara, her autobiography, I: 1 _seq._;
    her ancestry, 9 _seq._;
    her parents, 16 _seq._;
    her childhood, 19 _seq._;
    her timidity, 20;
    her education, 20 _seq._;
    her dog, Button, 26;
    her fondness for verses, 26;
    her skill as a horsewoman, 27;
    her horse, Billy, 30;
    her presence at the killing of an ox, 34;
    her youth, 36 _seq._;
    her illness in childhood, 37;
    nurse of her brother David, 37;
    ceased to grow at 12, 38;
    learned to weave, 38;
    how she kept the Sabbath, 39;
    did not learn to dance, 42;
    a child’s party, 43;
    her books, 48;
    her first experience as a teacher, 50;
    her “waifish dresses,” 56;
    at Clinton Institute, 60;
    teacher at Bordentown, 62;
    her home letters, 68 _seq._;
    her verses on the steamboat, 75;
    her lovers, 76 _seq._;
    her too great sensitiveness, 20, 85;
    her work in the Patent Office, 89 _seq._;
    her styles of handwriting, 91;
    her home letters, 94-101;
    cares for soldiers of Sixth Massachusetts, 107;
    at Battle of Bull Run, 119;
    her relations with her family, 131 _seq._;
    visit to New England in December, 1861, 136;
    return to Washington with supplies, 137;
    letter to Frances Childs, 141-44;
    her father’s last sickness, 145 _seq._;
    letter to her brother Stephen, 147 _seq._;
    decided to give herself to work at the battle-front, 154, 157;
    letter after Fredericksburg quoted, 154;
    letter to Gov. John A. Andrew, 158;
    her father’s death and burial, 161-63;
    her disappointment concerning permission to go to the front, 164;
    permission and passes obtained, 164;
    started for the front, 167;
    letter to Corporal Poor, 169;
    at Culpeper, or Cedar Mountain, 172 _seq._;
    another letter to Corporal Poor, 174;
    at Second Bull Run, 175 _seq._;
    letter to sister Julia, 192;
    starts for Harper’s Ferry, 194 _seq._;
    at Antietam, 199 _seq._;
    at Fredericksburg, 212 _seq._;
    letter to Vira Stone, 212 _seq._;
    how she dressed at the front, 220, 221;
    received a box from Anna Childs, 221 _seq._;
    at Hilton Head, S.C., 225 _seq._;
    witnesses futile attempt to capture Ft. Sumter, 238;
    serenaded as the Florence Nightingale of America, 242;
    her views of peace and patriotism, 245-48;
    her requisition for a flatiron, 248;
    witnessed assault on Ft. Wagner, 248-50;
    sick in summer of 1863, 250 _seq._;
    met with official arrogance, 254;
    declined to criticize Dorothea Dix, 255 _seq._;
    her position in Patent Office, 258 _seq._;
    returned to Washington, 262;
    at Worcester, 263;
    listened to H. W. Beecher, 263;
    her political views in 1864, 264-68;
    listened to George Thompson, 269;
    her change of opinion concerning John Brown, 269;
    at Spotsylvania and Wilderness, 272 _seq._;
    returns to Washington to better care for soldiers, 278-79;
    why she did not work under Commissions, 280;
    returns to Washington in 1864, 282;
    appointed superintendent of nurses, Army of the James, 282 _seq._;
    describes Fourth of July celebration, 283-85;
    letters to Frances Childs Vassall and Annie Childs, 286-96;
    describes death of her brother Stephen, 298-99;
    her verses on “The Women Who Went to the Field,” 301-03;
    drew her salary as clerk in the Patent Office till August, 1865,
     304;
    at Andersonville, 304 _seq._;
    appointed by President Lincoln to find missing soldiers, 305;
    assisted in her work by Pres. Andrew Johnson, 307-09;
    approved and passes issued by Gen. Grant, 309-10;
    sometimes had greater success than missing men desired, 311-13;
    letter from grateful soldier, 313-14;
    four years in work for missing men, 316;
    appointed by Secretary Stanton to visit Andersonville, 317 _seq._;
    devotes herself to release of Dorence Atwater, 321-25;
    publishes his lists in _New York Tribune_, 326;
    wanted to write a book, 328-33;
    chose lecture platform instead, 342 _seq._;
    her finances, 340-41;
    bought a new home, 347;
    nervous breakdown, 348;
    first voyage to Europe, II: 1;
    first knowledge of the Red Cross, 2;
    in Switzerland, 8;
    in Corsica, 8;
    in Berne, 9;
    accepts invitation to serve Red Cross in Franco-Prussian War, 11
     _seq._;
    at Basle, 12;
    at Mülhausen, 14;
    at Strassburg, 17;
    at Carlsruhe, 19;
    letter to Frances Childs Vassall, 23;
    at Paris, 31;
    at Lyons, 32;
    at Carlsruhe, 40;
    at Belforte, 44;
    declines gift and receives annuity, 53;
    letter to her sister Sarah, 55;
    at Montbéliard, 56;
    in Italy, 64;
    in London, 65;
    at Isle of Wight, 73 _seq._;
    in London, 77;
    letter to Mrs. Vassall, 79;
    letter to Bernard Barton Vassall, 81;
    letter to Mamie Barton Stafford, 83;
    returns to America, 84;
    only person in America in 1873 wearing Red Cross, 88;
    the nature of her sickness, 89-91;
    letter to Mr. Dwight, 91-92;
    at Dansville Sanitarium, 92 _seq._;
    letter to John D. De Frieze, 93;
    letter to the Grand Duchess of Baden, 95-100;
    recovery of health, 100 _seq._;
    letter to Mamie Stafford, 104;
    letter to German professor, 106;
    receives ovation on Memorial Day, 112;
    letter to Dr. Louis Appia, 121;
    his reply, 124;
    further correspondence, 130 _seq._;
    first pamphlet concerning Red Cross, 139;
    her first attempt at publicity, 145-46;
    correspondence with Pres. Garfield, 147-49;
    interview with James G. Blaine, 149 _seq._;
    interview with Robert T. Lincoln, 151;
    letter from James G. Blaine approving Red Cross, 154;
    her first public announcement of the Red Cross, 157;
    elected president American Red Cross, 159;
    organizes first local Red Cross society in America, 162;
    interviews President Arthur, 163;
    appears before Senate Committee, 164;
    first work of American Red Cross, 169;
    encounters opposition of rival organizations, 172 _seq._;
    visits State Department, 179 _seq._;
    sees the Red Cross Treaty, 179-81;
    receives news of adoption of Treaty, 184;
    in Mississippi floods, 196 _seq._;
    becomes matron at Sherborn, 199-214;
    her love of the color of red, 218, 347;
    Louisiana tornado, 220;
    Ohio River floods, 221;
    Texas famine, 224;
    Mount Vernon tornado, 228;
    yellow fever epidemic, 229;
    Johnstown, 231;
    Sea Islands hurricane, 240;
    Armenia, 244;
    in Constantinople, 248;
    decorated by Sultan, 254;
    attended International Conference at Geneva, 260;
    introduced the “American Amendment,” 261;
    letter from Louise, Grand Duchess of Baden, 264;
    letter to Mamie Stafford, 268;
    address at Wellesley, 270;
    is pressed for money for expenses of Red Cross, 271;
    accepts Red Cross Farm, 272 _seq._;
    in Cuba, 280-93;
    receives thanks of Congress, 293;
    at Galveston, 294;
    at St. Petersburg, 296;
    friction in Red Cross, 298;
    Committee of Investigation, 300;
    resigns from Red Cross, 300;
    considers removal to Mexico, 301;
    at home, 307-16;
    her religion, 317-25;
    her personality, 326-60;
    her last years, 361-68;
    her death, 369-74;
    her funeral, 374-78;
    her resurrection, 379.

  Barton, Clarissa Harlowe, aunt of Clara Barton, I: 15.

  Barton, David, brother of Clara, I: 20, 31;
    his accident, 38;
    his marriage, 53, 54;
    letters of Clara to, 70 _seq._, 111, 225;
    letter from, concerning her home life, 199, 200.

  Barton, Dolly, I: 15.

  Barton, Dorothy, sister of Clara, I: 132.

  Barton, Dorothy Moore, wife of Dr. Stephen, I: 14.

  Barton, Lady Editha, I: 10.

  Barton, Edmund, I: 13.

  Barton, Edward, of Salem, I: 11.

  Barton, Elijah Moore, I: 14, 15.

  Barton, Elizabeth Rich, wife of Stephen (brother of Clara), I: 132.

  Barton, Gideon, I: 14.

  Barton, Hannah, I: 15.

  Barton, Hannah, wife of Samuel, I: 12.

  Barton, Ida, I: 133.

  Barton, Dr. John, I: 11.

  Barton, Julia, wife of David, her marriage, I: 54;
    her interest in Clara’s wardrobe, 56;
    letters of Clara to, 94-100.

  Barton, Sir Leysing de, I: 9.

  Barton, Luke, I: 15.

  Barton, Mamie, niece of Clara, _see_ Stafford, Mrs. John.

  Barton, Martha, wife of Edward, I: 10.

  Barton, Matthew de, I: 10.

  Barton, Pamela, I: 15.

  Barton, Polly, I: 15.

  Barton, Samuel, of Framingham, I: 11, 12.

  Barton, Samuel, nephew of Clara, letter to her, I: 145;
    letter from her, 227.

  Barton, Sarah, sister of Clara, _see_ Vassall, Mrs. Vester.

  Barton, Sarah Stone, mother of Clara, I: 17;
    taught Clara to make pies, 36;
    her death, 62;
    Clara’s love for, 134.

  Barton, Dr. Stephen, grandfather of Clara, I: 14.

  Barton, Captain Stephen, father of Clara, I: 15, 16 _seq._;
    Clara’s reference in her letters, 111;
    his children, 132;
    Clara’s love for him, 134;
    last sickness, 145 _seq._;
    encouraged his daughter Clara to go to the front, 154, 157;
    his death, 161, 162;
    funeral, 162.

  Barton, Stephen, brother of Clara, I: 30;
    letter of Clara to, 91 _seq._;
    in North Carolina, 101;
    letter of Clara to, 102 _seq._;
    his marriage, 132;
    letter of Clara to, 147 _seq._, 225;
    his capture, rescue, and death, 297-300.

  Barton, Stephen E., nephew of Clara, on Clara Barton’s lovers, I: 77;
    letter of Clara to, 278;
    in work for Cuba, 283, 370.

  Barton, Rev. William E., visited by Clara, II: 366;
    conducts Clara’s funeral service, 320, 376;
    baptises a little girl at Clara’s funeral, 379.

  Barton family, its origin and history, I: 9 _seq._

  Bartonville, N. C., named for Stephen, I: 132.

  Basle, Clara Barton in, II: 11.

  Bastian, G., II: 162.

  Belle Plaine, Clara Barton at, I: 278.

  Bellows, Rev. H. W., I: 3; II: 2, 4, 117 _seq._, 165, 166, 353.

  Berne, Clara Barton in, II: 9.

  Bickerdyke, “Mother,” I: 296, 343.

  Bismarck, correspondence with Clara Barton, II: 20.

  Blaine, James G., II: 2, 149 _seq._;
    letter to Clara Barton approving Red Cross, 153;
    letter from Gustave Moynier, 154;
    endorsement of Red Cross, 157;
    submits recommendation on Treaty of Geneva, 163;
    Clara Barton’s letter to, 201, 202;
    assists in Russian famine, 239.

  Blaine, Walker, II: 159.

  Bordentown, N.J., where Clara Barton taught, I: 53, 62.

  Bowles, Charles S. P., II: 2, 117.

  Breck, T. S., Asst. Adj. Gen., I: 310.

  Bridges, Edward, I: 12.

  Brown, John, I: 101-03.

  Brush, A. P., II: 162.

  Buchanan, President James, I: 98.

  Bull Run, Battle of, I: 119 _seq._;
    Second Bull Run, 175 _seq._

  Bunnell, Mark J., II: 162.

  Burnside, Gen. Ambrose E., II: 30.

  Butler, Gen. B. F., Commander of Army of the James and friend of Clara
   Barton, I: 282;
    failed to secure Cabinet appointment, 339-41;
    appoints Clara Barton superintendent at Sherborn, 205.

  Butler, M. C., II: 242.


  Cameron, Simon, I: 128.

  Canfield, Mrs. S. A. M., II: 159, 198.

  Carlsruhe, Clara Barton at, II: 19, 40.

  Cedar Mountain, battle of, I: 172, 173.

  Chantilly, battle of, I: 179.

  Childs, Anna, letter to, I: 104;
    letters of Clara Barton to, 221, 290-96; II: 32, 347.

  Childs, B. W., I: 109.

  Childs, Frances, _see_ Vassall, Mrs. B. B.

  Clinton Institute (N.Y.), where Clara Barton attended school, I: 157.

  Colvin, Mrs. Mary, II: 162.

  Conger, Omar D., II: 152, 167, 170, 198.

  Constantinople, Clara Barton in, II: 248.

  Corsica, Clara Barton in, II: 8.

  Cuba, Clara Barton in, II: 280-93.

  Culpeper, battle of, I: 173.


  Dahlgren, Admiral John, I: 249.

  Dansville, Clara Barton at, II: 92 seq.;
    first local organization of Red Cross, 93;
    gives ovation to Clara Barton, 112.

  Davis, Hon. John, II: 193.

  Davis, J. C. B., II: 198.

  De Frieze, John D., letter of Clara Barton to, II: 93.

  De Witt, Col. Alexander, I: 89, 90, 95, 156.

  Diggles, Jonas, I: 192.

  Diggles, William, I: 192.

  Dix, Dorothea Lynde, superintendent of Army nurses, outline of her
   work, I: 230-37; 296;
    did not love publicity, 328-29;
    did not desire to be imitated, 329; 343.

  Douglass, Frederick, II: 198.

  Dunant, J. Henri, II: 4;
    establishment of Red Cross, 116.

  Dunn, Dr., I: 200.

  Dwight, Edward, II: 44, 50, 54, 91.

  Dwight, Rev. H. O., II: 244, 252, 255.


  Eddy, Mrs. Mary Baker, II: 318.

  Edmunds, Hon. George F., II: 163, 179.

  Ellsworth, Elmer, I: 116.

  Elwell, Gen. J. G., I: 241 _seq._, 249 _seq._, 251.

  Elwell, J. K., II: 283.

  Epler, Rev. Percy H., author of biography of Clara Barton, II: 319;
    at Clara Barton’s funeral, 320.


  Falmouth, Va., I: 210.

  Faulkner, Mrs. James, II: 162.

  Faulkner, Riley, Ohio soldier, I: 219.

  Ferry, Thomas W., II: 164.

  Field, Father, of the Cowley Fathers, II: 352.

  Fitts, Nancy, schoolmate of Clara Barton, I: 24.

  Fletcher, Dr. J. W., I: 161.

  Fogg, George P., II: 2, 117.

  Fowler, L. W., I: 46 _seq._, 50.

  Franco-Prussian War, II: 11 _seq._

  Franklin, Gen. William B., I: 197, 214.

  Fredericksburg, battle of, I: 154 _seq._

  Frelinghuysen, Hon. F. T., II: 189, 192, 260.

  Fremont, Gen. John C., I: 98.

  French, Alice, II: 239.


  Gallagher, Thomas E., II: 162.

  Galpin, Mrs. L. Q., II: 162.

  Galveston, tornado at, II: 294.

  Garfield, President James A., II; 3,
  147-49;
    nominates Clara Barton President of Red Cross, 157, 159;
    assassinated, 160.

  Garnett, A. Y. P., II: 159, 198.

  Glen Echo, Red Cross headquarters, II: 307.

  Golay family, II: 8.

  Gough, John B., advises Clara Barton to lecture, I: 342.

  Grant, Gen. U. S., requests printing of Clara Barton’s lists, I: 309;
    issues passes for her, 310.

  Greeley, Horace, publishes Dorence Atwater’s lists at Clara Barton’s
   request, I: 326.

  Green, Rev. Joseph K., II: 253-55.

  Gregor, Alexander, II: 239.


  Hale, Judge Robert, I: 86.

  Hall, J. Brainard, II: 376.

  Hamilton, Charles, I: 180.

  Hamlin, Rev. Cyrus, II: 253.

  Hill, Hon. Benjamin H., II: 164.

  Hinton, R. J., II: 159.

  Hitchcock, Dr. Alfred, I: 161.

  Hitchcock, Gen. E. A., letter appointing Clara Barton for search of
   missing men, I: 306; 309.

  Hitz, John, II: 3, 346.

  Hoffman, Gen. William, I: 309.

  Hooker, Gen. Joseph, I: 197, 200, 214.

  Horr, Hon. George A., II: 167.

  Hosmer, F. J., letter from, I: 313-14.

  Howard, Gen. O. O., I: 201.

  Howe, Julia Ward, “Battle Hymn of the Republic,” I: 144;
    Clara Barton’s comment on, II: 328.

  Hubbell, Dr. Julian B., II: 216, 220-21, 240, 251, 260, 290, 329.

  Hunter, Gen. David, I: 241, 243.


  Jackson, Chaplain, I: 189.

  Jackson, Rev. E. W., I: 170.

  Jackson, Dr. J. H., II: 162.

  Jackson, P. T., II: 50-52.

  Jackson, Gen. Stonewall, I: 173.

  Johnson, President Andrew, orders
  printing of lists at request of Clara Barton, I: 307-09.

  Johnson, Mrs. Fannie B., II: 162.

  Johnston, John W., II: 164.

  Johnstown flood, II: 231 _seq._

  Joslyn, Mrs. A. L., II: 326.


  Kansas and the slavery question, I: 98, 104.

  Kearny, Gen. Phil, I: 188.

  Kennan, George, II: 156, 159.

  Klopsch, Louis, II: 283.

  Knapp, Rev. George P., II: 253.


  Lacy House, Fredericksburg, I: 211, 214.

  Lamb, Capt. Samuel T., I: 241.

  Lapham, Hon. Elbridge G., I: 164, 179, 184.

  Lawrence, William, II: 159.

  Learned family, I: 13 _seq._

  Lee, Gen. Robert E., I: 209.

  Leggett, Gen. M. D., I: 249.

  Lincoln, Abraham, inaugurated, I: 105 _seq._;
    promised to free the slaves, 199;
    appoints Clara Barton to find missing soldiers, 305, 336, 337.

  Lincoln, Robert T., Clara Barton’s interview with, II: 151.

  Logan, Mrs. John A., II: 374.

  London, Clara Barton in, II: 8, 77.

  Loring, George B., II: 159.

  Louisiana tornado, II: 220.

  Louise, Grand Duchess of Baden, II: 19;
    letter of Clara Barton to, 95-100;
    letter to Clara Barton, 264.

  Lowell, James Russell, quoted, I: 143.


  Maine, sinking of the, II: 285 _seq._

  Margot, Antoinette, II: 14 _seq._, 40 _seq._, 56, 262.

  Marvin, Rev. John P., II: 376.

  Mason, Hon. Charles, I: 90.

  McClellan, Gen. George B., I: 199, 209.

  McDowell, Gen. Irvin, I: 179.

  McKinley, President William, Message to Congress, in appreciation of
   Clara Barton, II: 293.

  Meighan, T. W., Clara Barton’s letter to, I: 245 _seq._

  Menseur, Rev. Mr., teacher of Clara Barton, I: 24.

  Miller, Hon. John, II: 163.

  Moore family, I: 13, 15.

  Morgan, Benjamin, II: 35.

  Morgan, Hon. J. T., II: 164.

  Morris Island, Clara Barton at, I: 250.

  Mount Vernon tornado, II: 228.

  Moynier, Gustave, II: 120;
    letter to J. G. Blaine, 154, 190.

  Mülhausen, II: 14, 17.

  Mussey, R. D., II: 159, 198.


  Norton family, I: 62.


  Ohio River floods, II: 220.


  Parthia, steamship, Clara Barton on, II: 84-87.

  Patrick, Gen. John H., I: 218.

  Peet, Rev. W. W., II: 248, 252, 253.

  Philbrick, H. A., II: 376.

  Phrenology, I: 46.

  Pierce, Dr. Delano, I: 29.

  Pierce, President Franklin, I: 89.

  Poor, Corporal Leander, I: 169, 225, 241.

  Pope, Gen. John, I: 179.

  Pratt, Major E. H., II: 162.

  Proctor, Hon. Redfield, II: 298 _seq._


  Red Cross, Clara Barton’s first knowledge of, II: 1, 11;
    first pamphlet concerning, 139-43;
    birth of movement, 144 _seq._;
    her first attempt at publicity, 145-46;
    in forest fires of Michigan, 169;
    in Mississippi floods, 196;
    in subsequent disasters, 219-58;
    friction in, 298 _seq._;
    Clara Barton resigns from, 300;
    incarnates her spirit, 379.

  Reno, Gen. Jesse L., I: 197.

  Riccius, Ida Barton, II: 199;
    letter of Clara Barton to, 275.

  Roosevelt, President Theodore, II: 298.

  Roses, Wars of the, I: 10.

  Rucker, Gen. D. H., I: 167, 207, 227, 273, 308.

  Russian famine, II: 237.


  Sanitary Commission, I: 168.

  Schoppe, Rev. Mr., II: 318.

  Sea Islands hurricane, II: 240.

  Sears, Gen. William H., II: 299.

  Seward, Frederick H., II: 150.

  Seymour, Gen. Truman, I: 264, 266.

  Shaw, Col. Robert G., I: 249.

  Sheldon, Hon. Joseph, II: 260.

  Sheldon family, II: 64, 74.

  Sherborn, Clara Barton at, II: 199-214.

  Sherburne, Adj. Gen. John P., I: 316.

  Simmons, Charles E., I: 190.

  Sliney, William F., II: 159.

  Smith, Mrs. Mary R., II: 162.

  Solomons, A. S., II: 159.

  South Mountain, battle of, I: 197.

  Spain, war with, II: 290.

  Spotsylvania, battle of, I: 272 _seq._

  Stafford, Mrs. John (Mamie Barton), letter of Clara to, II: 83; 104;
   268.

  Stanton, Edwin M., appoints Clara Barton to visit Andersonville,
   I: 317-20.

  Stone family, I: 17.

  Stone, Colonel, teacher of Clara Barton, I: 26.

  Stone, Vira, I: 212, 213.

  Strassburg, Clara Barton in, II: 11.

  Stratford-on-Avon, Clara Barton visits, II: 84.

  Strobel, P. A., II: 162.

  Sturgis, S. D., II: 159.

  Sullivan, W. S., II: 260.

  Sumner, Hon. Charles, I: 98.

  Sumter, Fort, attempt to recapture, I: 238.

  Suydam, Mr., chairman Bordentown School Board, I: 62, 63.

  Sweet, George A., II: 162.


  Taylor family, II: 64, 73.

  Terrell, Hon. A. W., II: 325.

  Texas famine, II: 224 _seq._

  Thayer, Eli, I: 104, 105.

  Thompson, Rev. George, address in Washington, I: 269, 270.

  Tillinghast, B. F., II: 239.

  Tillman, Gov. Benjamin, II: 242.

  Tilton, Theodore, presides at Clara Barton’s lecture, I: 344.

  Tolstoy, Count, II: 239.

  Torrey, Susan, teacher of Clara Barton, I: 24.

  Trask, Spencer, II: 245.

  Treaty of Geneva, II: 161 _seq._; 188 _seq._

  Tribune, New York, I: 326; II: 22.

  Tufts, Gardiner, I: 174.

  Tyler, Rev. Dr., II: 320, 377.


  Universalist Church, in Oxford, I: 39 _seq._;
    that of Clara Barton’s parents, 317.

  Upton, Mr. and Mrs., II: 9.


  Vanderlip, J. A., II: 162.

  Vassall, Bernard Barton, I: 133;
   letter of Clara Barton to, II: 81.

  Vassall, Mrs. Bernard Barton, formerly Frances Childs, teacher with
   Clara at Bordentown, I: 65;
    her memories, 66 _seq._;
    Clara’s letters to, 114;
    describes Clara’s Washington home, 121;
    her marriage, 133;
    letter of Clara to, 141;
    description of Clara Barton’s attire, 221;
    letters of Clara Barton to, 286-89; II: 23, 36, 77.

  Vassall, Irving, I: 134.

  Vassall, Mrs. Vester, Clara Barton’s sister Sarah, I: 133; II: 56, 65;
    sickness and death, 89.

  Venice, Clara Barton in, II: 64, 72.

  Verona, Clara Barton in, II: 71.

  Voris, Gen. Alvin C., I: 249.


  Wagner, Fort, assault on, I: 248.

  Ward, George K., II: 162.

  Washburn, Dr. George, II: 253.

  Wellesley, Clara Barton at, II: 270.

  Wells, Rev. C. M., I: 210, 227.

  Whiteman, Mrs. Reuben, II: 162.

  Wight, Isle of, II: 73.

  Wilderness, Battle of the, I: 273.

  Willard, Frances, Clara Barton’s letter to, II: 203, 204.

  William the Conqueror, I: 9.

  Wilson, Senator Henry, called on Clara Barton on her return from
  Hilton Head, I: 264-66;
    corrects abuses reported by Clara Barton, 278-79;
    Clara Barton’s letters concerning her desire to write a book,
     330-33.

  Windom, Hon. William, II: 163, 167.

  Woodruff, Oscar, II: 162.


  Yellow fever epidemic, II: 229.

  Young, Charles S., correspondence with Clara Barton, II: 301-303.


  Zouaves, I: 116.




Transcriber’s Notes

Page 145: “no executive actio” changed to “no executive action”

Page 146: “stanch friends” changed to “staunch friends”

Page 254: “translaion of which” changed to “translation of which”

Page 345: “selfa-ccusation” changed to “self-accusation”

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CLARA BARTON,
VOLUME II (OF 2) ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
